Chapter Fourteen

SEMICONDUCTOR
ELECTRONICS:
MATERIALS, DEVICES
AND SIMPLE CIRCUITS
14.1 INTRODUCTION
Devices in which a controlled flow of electrons can be obtained are the
basic building blocks of all the electronic circuits. Before the discovery of
transistor in 1948, such devices were mostly vacuum tubes (also called
valves) like the vacuum diode which has two electrodes, viz., anode (often
called plate) and cathode; triode which has three electrodes – cathode,
plate and grid; tetrode and pentode (respectively with 4 and 5 electrodes).
In a vacuum tube, the electrons are supplied by a heated cathode and
the controlled flow of these electrons in vacuum is obtained by varying
the voltage between its different electrodes. Vacuum is required in the
inter-electrode space; otherwise the moving electrons may lose their
energy on collision with the air molecules in their path. In these devices
the electrons can flow only from the cathode to the anode (i.e., only in one
direction). Therefore, such devices are generally referred to as valves.
These vacuum tube devices are bulky, consume high power, operate
generally at high voltages (~100 V ) and have limited life and low reliability.
The seed of the development of modern solid-state semiconductor
electronics goes back to 1930’s when it was realised that some solidstate semiconductors and their junctions offer the possibility of controlling
the number and the direction of flow of charge carriers through them.
Simple excitations like light, heat or small applied voltage can change
the number of mobile charges in a semiconductor. Note that the supply
2022-23

Physics
and flow of charge carriers in the semiconductor devices are within the
solid itself, while in the earlier vacuum tubes/valves, the mobile electrons
were obtained from a heated cathode and they were made to flow in an
evacuated space or vacuum. No external heating or large evacuated space
is required by the semiconductor devices. They are small in size, consume
low power, operate at low voltages and have long life and high reliability.
Even the Cathode Ray Tubes (CRT) used in television and computer
monitors which work on the principle of vacuum tubes are being replaced
by Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) monitors with supporting solid state
electronics. Much before the full implications of the semiconductor devices
was formally understood, a naturally occurring crystal of galena (Lead
sulphide, PbS) with a metal point contact attached to it was used as
detector of radio waves.
In the following sections, we will introduce the basic concepts of
semiconductor physics and discuss some semiconductor devices like
junction diodes (a 2-electrode device) and bipolar junction transistor (a
3-electrode device). A few circuits illustrating their applications will also
be described.

14.2 CLASSIFICATION OF METALS, CONDUCTORS
SEMICONDUCTORS

468

AND

On the basis of conductivity
On the basis of the relative values of electrical conductivity (σ ) or resistivity
( ρ = 1/σ ), the solids are broadly classified as:
(i) Metals: They possess very low resistivity (or high conductivity).
ρ ~ 10–2 – 10–8 Ω m
σ ~ 102 – 108 S m–1
(ii) Semiconductors: They have resistivity or conductivity intermediate
to metals and insulators.
ρ ~ 10–5 – 106 Ω m
σ ~ 105 – 10–6 S m–1
(iii)Insulators: They have high resistivity (or low conductivity).
ρ ~ 1011 – 1019 Ω m
σ ~ 10–11 – 10–19 S m–1
The values of ρ and σ given above are indicative of magnitude and
could well go outside the ranges as well. Relative values of the resistivity
are not the only criteria for distinguishing metals, insulators and
semiconductors from each other. There are some other differences, which
will become clear as we go along in this chapter.
Our interest in this chapter is in the study of semiconductors which
could be:
(i) Elemental semiconductors: Si and Ge
(ii) Compound semiconductors: Examples are:
• Inorganic: CdS, GaAs, CdSe, InP, etc.
• Organic: anthracene, doped pthalocyanines, etc.
• Organic polymers: polypyrrole, polyaniline, polythiophene, etc.
Most of the currently available semiconductor devices are based on
elemental semiconductors Si or Ge and compound inorganic
2022-23

Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
semiconductors. However, after 1990, a few semiconductor devices using
organic semiconductors and semiconducting polymers have been
developed signalling the birth of a futuristic technology of polymerelectronics and molecular-electronics. In this chapter, we will restrict
ourselves to the study of inorganic semiconductors, particularly
elemental semiconductors Si and Ge. The general concepts introduced
here for discussing the elemental semiconductors, by-and-large, apply
to most of the compound semiconductors as well.
On the basis of energy bands
According to the Bohr atomic model, in an isolated atom the energy of
any of its electrons is decided by the orbit in which it revolves. But when
the atoms come together to form a solid they are close to each other. So
the outer orbits of electrons from neighbouring atoms would come very
close or could even overlap. This would make the nature of electron motion
in a solid very different from that in an isolated atom.
Inside the crystal each electron has a unique position and no two
electrons see exactly the same pattern of surrounding charges. Because
of this, each electron will have a different energy level. These different
energy levels with continuous energy variation form what are called
energy bands. The energy band which includes the energy levels of the
valence electrons is called the valence band. The energy band above the
valence band is called the conduction band. With no external energy, all
the valence electrons will reside in the valence band. If the lowest level in
the conduction band happens to be lower than the highest level of the
valence band, the electrons from the valence band can easily move into
the conduction band. Normally the conduction band is empty. But when
it overlaps on the valence band electrons can move freely into it. This is
the case with metallic conductors.
If there is some gap between the conduction band and the valence
band, electrons in the valence band all remain bound and no free electrons
are available in the conduction band. This makes the material an
insulator. But some of the electrons from the valence band may gain
external energy to cross the gap between the conduction band and the
valence band. Then these electrons will move into the conduction band.
At the same time they will create vacant energy levels in the valence band
where other valence electrons can move. Thus the process creates the
possibility of conduction due to electrons in conduction band as well as
due to vacancies in the valence band.
Let us consider what happens in the case of Si or Ge crystal containing
N atoms. For Si, the outermost orbit is the third orbit (n = 3), while for Ge
it is the fourth orbit (n = 4). The number of electrons in the outermost
orbit is 4 (2s and 2p electrons). Hence, the total number of outer electrons
in the crystal is 4N. The maximum possible number of electrons in the
outer orbit is 8 (2s + 6p electrons). So, for the 4N valence electrons there
are 8N available energy states. These 8N discrete energy levels can either
form a continuous band or they may be grouped in different bands
depending upon the distance between the atoms in the crystal (see box
on Band Theory of Solids).
At the distance between the atoms in the crystal lattices of Si and Ge,
the energy band of these 8N states is split apart into two which are
separated by an energy gap Eg (Fig. 14.1). The lower band which is
2022-23

469

Physics
completely occupied by the 4N valence electrons at temperature of absolute
zero is the valence band. The other band consisting of 4N energy states,
called the conduction band, is completely empty at absolute zero.

BAND

THEORY OF SOLIDS

Consider that the Si or Ge crystal
contains N atoms. Electrons of each
atom will have discrete energies in
different orbits. The electron energy
will be same if all the atoms are
isolated, i.e., separated from each
other by a large distance. However,
in a crystal, the atoms are close to
each other (2 to 3 Å) and therefore
the electrons interact with each
other and also with the
neighbouring atomic cores. The
overlap (or interaction) will be more
felt by the electrons in the
outermost orbit while the inner
orbit or core electron energies may
remain unaffected. Therefore, for understanding electron energies in Si or Ge crystal, we
need to consider the changes in the energies of the electrons in the outermost orbit only.
For Si, the outermost orbit is the third orbit (n = 3), while for Ge it is the fourth orbit
(n = 4). The number of electrons in the outermost orbit is 4 (2s and 2p electrons). Hence,
the total number of outer electrons in the crystal is 4N. The maximum possible number of
outer electrons in the orbit is 8 (2s + 6p electrons). So, out of the 4N electrons, 2N electrons
are in the 2N s-states (orbital quantum number l = 0) and 2N electrons are in the available
6N p-states. Obviously, some p-electron states are empty as shown in the extreme right of
Figure. This is the case of well separated or isolated atoms [region A of Figure].
Suppose these atoms start coming nearer to each other to form a solid. The energies
of these electrons in the outermost orbit may change (both increase and decrease) due to
the interaction between the electrons of different atoms. The 6N states for l = 1, which
originally had identical energies in the isolated atoms, spread out and form an energy
band [region B in Figure]. Similarly, the 2N states for l = 0, having identical energies in
the isolated atoms, split into a second band (carefully see the region B of Figure) separated
from the first one by an energy gap.
At still smaller spacing, however, there comes a region in which the bands merge with
each other. The lowest energy state that is a split from the upper atomic level appears to
drop below the upper state that has come from the lower atomic level. In this region (region
C in Figure), no energy gap exists where the upper and lower energy states get mixed.
Finally, if the distance between the atoms further decreases, the energy bands again
split apart and are separated by an energy gap Eg (region D in Figure). The total number
of available energy states 8N has been re-apportioned between the two bands (4N states
each in the lower and upper energy bands). Here the significant point is that there are
exactly as many states in the lower band (4N ) as there are available valence electrons
from the atoms (4N ).
Therefore, this band ( called the valence band ) is completely filled while the upper
band is completely empty. The upper band is called the conduction band.

470
2022-23

Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
The lowest energy level in the
conduction band is shown as EC and
highest energy level in the valence band
is shown as EV . Above EC and below EV
there are a large number of closely spaced
energy levels, as shown in Fig. 14.1.
The gap between the top of the valence
band and bottom of the conduction band
is called the energy band gap (Energy gap
Eg ). It may be large, small, or zero,
depending upon the material. These
different situations, are depicted in Fig.
14.2 and discussed below:
Case I: This refers to a situation, as
shown in Fig. 14.2(a). One can have a
metal either when the conduction band
FIGURE 14.1 The energy band positions in a
is partially filled and the balanced band
semiconductor
at 0 K. The upper band, called the
is partially empty or when the conduction
conduction
band,
consists of infinitely large number
and valance bands overlap. When there
of closely spaced energy states. The lower band,
is overlap electrons from valence band can
called the valence band, consists of closely spaced
easily move into the conduction band.
completely filled energy states.
This situation makes a large number of
electrons available for electrical conduction. When the valence band is
partially empty, electrons from its lower level can move to higher level
making conduction possible. Therefore, the resistance of such materials
is low or the conductivity is high.

FIGURE 14.2 Difference between energy bands of (a) metals,
(b) insulators and (c) semiconductors.
2022-23

471

Physics
Case II: In this case, as shown in Fig. 14.2(b), a large band gap Eg exists
(Eg > 3 eV). There are no electrons in the conduction band, and therefore
no electrical conduction is possible. Note that the energy gap is so large
that electrons cannot be excited from the valence band to the conduction
band by thermal excitation. This is the case of insulators.
Case III: This situation is shown in Fig. 14.2(c). Here a finite but small
band gap (Eg < 3 eV) exists. Because of the small band gap, at room
temperature some electrons from valence band can acquire enough
energy to cross the energy gap and enter the conduction band. These
electrons (though small in numbers) can move in the conduction band.
Hence, the resistance of semiconductors is not as high as that of the
insulators.
In this section we have made a broad classification of metals,
conductors and semiconductors. In the section which follows you will
learn the conduction process in semiconductors.

14.3 INTRINSIC SEMICONDUCTOR
We shall take the most common case of Ge and Si whose lattice structure
is shown in Fig. 14.3. These structures are called the diamond-like
structures. Each atom is surrounded by four nearest neighbours. We
know that Si and Ge have four valence electrons. In its crystalline
structure, every Si or Ge atom tends to share one of its four valence
electrons with each of its four nearest neighbour atoms, and also to take
share of one electron from each such neighbour. These shared electron
pairs are referred to as forming a covalent bond or simply a valence
bond. The two shared electrons can be assumed to shuttle back-andforth between the associated atoms holding them together strongly.
Figure 14.4 schematically shows the 2-dimensional representation of Si
or Ge structure shown in Fig. 14.3 which overemphasises the covalent
bond. It shows an idealised picture in which no bonds are broken (all
bonds are intact). Such a situation arises at low
temperatures. As the temperature increases, more
thermal energy becomes available to these electrons
and some of these electrons may break–away
(becoming free electrons contributing to conduction).
The thermal energy effectively ionises only a few atoms
in the crystalline lattice and creates a vacancy in the
bond as shown in Fig. 14.5(a). The neighbourhood,
from which the free electron (with charge –q ) has come
out leaves a vacancy with an effective charge (+q ). This
vacancy with the effective positive electronic charge is
called a hole. The hole behaves as an apparent free
particle with effective positive charge.
In intrinsic semiconductors, the number of free
FIGURE 14.3 Three-dimensional diaelectrons,
ne is equal to the number of holes, nh. That is
mond-like crystal structure for Carbon,
n
=
n
(14.1)
Silicon or Germanium with
e
h = ni
is
called
intrinsic
carrier
concentration.
where
n
respective lattice spacing a equal
i
Semiconductors posses the unique property in
to 3.56, 5.43 and 5.66 Å.
472
which, apart from electrons, the holes also move.
2022-23

Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
Suppose there is a hole at site 1 as shown in
Fig. 14.5(a). The movement of holes can be
visualised as shown in Fig. 14.5(b). An electron
from the covalent bond at site 2 may jump to
the vacant site 1 (hole). Thus, after such a jump,
the hole is at site 2 and the site 1 has now an
electron. Therefore, apparently, the hole has
moved from site 1 to site 2. Note that the electron
originally set free [Fig. 14.5(a)] is not involved
in this process of hole motion. The free electron
moves completely independently as conduction
electron and gives rise to an electron current, Ie
under an applied electric field. Remember that
the motion of hole is only a convenient way of
FIGURE 14.4 Schematic two-dimensional
describing the actual motion of bound electrons,
representation of Si or Ge structure showing
whenever there is an empty bond anywhere in
covalent bonds at low temperature
(all bonds intact). +4 symbol
the crystal. Under the action of an electric field,
indicates
inner cores of Si or Ge.
these holes move towards negative potential
giving the hole current, Ih. The total current, I is
thus the sum of the electron current Ie and the
hole current Ih:
(14.2)
I = I e + Ih
It may be noted that apart from the process of generation of conduction
electrons and holes, a simultaneous process of recombination occurs in
which the electrons recombine with the holes. At equilibrium, the rate of
generation is equal to the rate of recombination of charge carriers. The
recombination occurs due to an electron colliding with a hole.

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 14.5 (a) Schematic model of generation of hole at site 1 and conduction electron
due to thermal energy at moderate temperatures. (b) Simplified representation of
possible thermal motion of a hole. The electron from the lower left hand covalent bond
(site 2) goes to the earlier hole site1, leaving a hole at its site indicating an
473
apparent movement of the hole from site 1 to site 2.
2022-23

Physics

FIGURE 14.6 (a) An intrinsic semiconductor at T = 0 K
behaves like insulator. (b) At T > 0 K, four thermally generated
electron-hole pairs. The filled circles ( ) represent electrons
and empty circles ( ) represent holes.

An intrinsic semiconductor
will behave like an insulator at
T = 0 K as shown in Fig. 14.6(a).
It is the thermal energy at
higher temperatures (T > 0K),
which excites some electrons
from the valence band to the
conduction band. These
thermally excited electrons at
T > 0 K, partially occupy the
conduction band. Therefore,
the energy-band diagram of an
intrinsic semiconductor will be
as shown in Fig. 14.6(b). Here,
some electrons are shown in
the conduction band. These
have come from the valence
band leaving equal number of
holes there.

EXAMPLE 14.1

Example 14.1 C, Si and Ge have same lattice structure. Why is C
insulator while Si and Ge intrinsic semiconductors?
Solution The 4 bonding electrons of C, Si or Ge lie, respectively, in
the second, third and fourth orbit. Hence, energy required to take
out an electron from these atoms (i.e., ionisation energy Eg ) will be
least for Ge, followed by Si and highest for C. Hence, number of free
electrons for conduction in Ge and Si are significant but negligibly
small for C.

14.4 EXTRINSIC SEMICONDUCTOR

474

The conductivity of an intrinsic semiconductor depends on its
temperature, but at room temperature its conductivity is very low. As
such, no important electronic devices can be developed using these
semiconductors. Hence there is a necessity of improving their
conductivity. This can be done by making use of impurities.
When a small amount, say, a few parts per million (ppm), of a suitable
impurity is added to the pure semiconductor, the conductivity of the
semiconductor is increased manifold. Such materials are known as
extrinsic semiconductors or impurity semiconductors. The deliberate
addition of a desirable impurity is called doping and the impurity atoms
are called dopants. Such a material is also called a doped semiconductor.
The dopant has to be such that it does not distort the original pure
semiconductor lattice. It occupies only a very few of the original
semiconductor atom sites in the crystal. A necessary condition to attain
this is that the sizes of the dopant and the semiconductor atoms should
be nearly the same.
There are two types of dopants used in doping the tetravalent Si
or Ge:
(i) Pentavalent (valency 5); like Arsenic (As), Antimony (Sb), Phosphorous
(P), etc.
2022-23

Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
(ii) Trivalent (valency 3); like Indium (In),
Boron (B), Aluminium (Al), etc.
We shall now discuss how the doping
changes the number of charge carriers (and
hence the conductivity) of semiconductors.
Si or Ge belongs to the fourth group in the
Periodic table and, therefore, we choose the
dopant element from nearby fifth or third
group, expecting and taking care that the
size of the dopant atom is nearly the same as
that of Si or Ge. Interestingly, the pentavalent
and trivalent dopants in Si or Ge give two
entirely different types of semiconductors as
discussed below.
(i) n-type semiconductor
Suppose we dope Si or Ge with a pentavalent
element as shown in Fig. 14.7. When an atom
of +5 valency element occupies the position
of an atom in the crystal lattice of Si, four of
its electrons bond with the four silicon
neighbours while the fifth remains very
weakly bound to its parent atom. This is
because the four electrons participating in
bonding are seen as part of the effective core FIGURE 14.7 (a) Pentavalent donor atom (As, Sb,
P, etc.) doped for tetravalent Si or Ge giving nof the atom by the fifth electron. As a result
type semiconductor, and (b) Commonly used
the ionisation energy required to set this
schematic representation of n-type material
electron free is very small and even at room
which shows only the fixed cores of the
temperature it will be free to move in the
substituent donors with one additional effective
lattice of the semiconductor. For example, the positive charge and its associated extra electron.
energy required is ~ 0.01 eV for germanium,
and 0.05 eV for silicon, to separate this
electron from its atom. This is in contrast to the energy required to jump
the forbidden band (about 0.72 eV for germanium and about 1.1 eV for
silicon) at room temperature in the intrinsic semiconductor. Thus, the
pentavalent dopant is donating one extra electron for conduction and
hence is known as donor impurity. The number of electrons made
available for conduction by dopant atoms depends strongly upon the
doping level and is independent of any increase in ambient temperature.
On the other hand, the number of free electrons (with an equal number
of holes) generated by Si atoms, increases weakly with temperature.
In a doped semiconductor the total number of conduction electrons
ne is due to the electrons contributed by donors and those generated
intrinsically, while the total number of holes nh is only due to the holes
from the intrinsic source. But the rate of recombination of holes would
increase due to the increase in the number of electrons. As a result, the
number of holes would get reduced further.
Thus, with proper level of doping the number of conduction electrons
475
can be made much larger than the number of holes. Hence in an extrinsic
2022-23

Physics
semiconductor doped with pentavalent impurity, electrons
become the majority carriers and holes the minority carriers.
These semiconductors are, therefore, known as n-type
semiconductors. For n-type semiconductors, we have,
n e >> nh
(14.3)
(ii) p-type semiconductor
This is obtained when Si or Ge is doped with a trivalent impurity
like Al, B, In, etc. The dopant has one valence electron less than
Si or Ge and, therefore, this atom can form covalent bonds with
neighbouring three Si atoms but does not have any electron to
offer to the fourth Si atom. So the bond between the fourth
neighbour and the trivalent atom has a vacancy or hole as shown
in Fig. 14.8. Since the neighbouring Si atom in the lattice wants
an electron in place of a hole, an electron in the outer orbit of
an atom in the neighbourhood may jump to fill this vacancy,
leaving a vacancy or hole at its own site. Thus the hole is
available for conduction. Note that the trivalent foreign atom
becomes effectively negatively charged when it shares fourth
electron with neighbouring Si atom. Therefore, the dopant atom
of p-type material can be treated as core of one negative charge
along with its associated hole as shown in Fig. 14.8(b). It is
obvious that one acceptor atom gives one hole. These holes are
in addition to the intrinsically generated holes while the source
of conduction electrons is only intrinsic generation. Thus, for
such a material, the holes are the majority carriers and electrons
FIGURE 14.8 (a) Trivalent
are minority carriers. Therefore, extrinsic semiconductors doped
acceptor atom (In, Al, B etc.)
with trivalent impurity are called p-type semiconductors. For
doped in tetravalent Si or Ge
p-type semiconductors, the recombination process will reduce
lattice giving p-type semiconthe number (n i )of intrinsically generated electrons to n e. We
ductor. (b) Commonly used
have, for p-type semiconductors
schematic representation of
(14.4)
n h >> ne
p-type material which shows
only the fixed core of the
Note that the crystal maintains an overall charge neutrality
substituent acceptor with
as the charge of additional charge carriers is just equal and
one effective additional
opposite to that of the ionised cores in the lattice.
negative charge and its
In extrinsic semiconductors, because of the abundance of
associated hole.
majority current carriers, the minority carriers produced
thermally have more chance of meeting majority carriers and
thus getting destroyed. Hence, the dopant, by adding a large number of
current carriers of one type, which become the majority carriers, indirectly
helps to reduce the intrinsic concentration of minority carriers.
The semiconductor’s energy band structure is affected by doping. In
the case of extrinsic semiconductors, additional energy states due to donor
impurities (ED ) and acceptor impurities (EA ) also exist. In the energy band
diagram of n-type Si semiconductor, the donor energy level E D is slightly
below the bottom EC of the conduction band and electrons from this level
move into the conduction band with very small supply of energy. At room
temperature, most of the donor atoms get ionised but very few (~10 12)
atoms of Si get ionised. So the conduction band will have most electrons
476
coming from the donor impurities, as shown in Fig. 14.9(a). Similarly,
2022-23

Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
for p-type semiconductor, the acceptor energy level EA is slightly above
the top EV of the valence band as shown in Fig. 14.9(b). With very small
supply of energy an electron from the valence band can jump to the level
EA and ionise the acceptor negatively. (Alternately, we can also say that
with very small supply of energy the hole from level EA sinks down into
the valence band. Electrons rise up and holes fall down when they gain
external energy.) At room temperature, most of the acceptor atoms get
ionised leaving holes in the valence band. Thus at room temperature the
density of holes in the valence band is predominantly due to impurity in
the extrinsic semiconductor. The electron and hole concentration in a
semiconductor in thermal equilibrium is given by
nenh = ni2

(14.5)

Though the above description is grossly approximate and
hypothetical, it helps in understanding the difference between metals,
insulators and semiconductors (extrinsic and intrinsic) in a simple
manner. The difference in the resistivity of C, Si and Ge depends upon
the energy gap between their conduction and valence bands. For C
(diamond), Si and Ge, the energy gaps are 5.4 eV, 1.1 eV and 0.7 eV,
respectively. Sn also is a group IV element but it is a metal because the
energy gap in its case is 0 eV.

FIGURE 14.9 Energy bands of (a) n-type semiconductor at T > 0K, (b) p-type
semiconductor at T > 0K.
Example 14.2 Suppose a pure Si crystal has 5 × 1028 atoms m–3. It is
doped by 1 ppm concentration of pentavalent As. Calculate the
number of electrons and holes. Given that ni =1.5 × 1016 m–3.

~ 4.5 × 109 m–3
2022-23

EXAMPLE 14.2

Solution Note that thermally generated electrons (ni ~1016 m–3 ) are
negligibly small as compared to those produced by doping.
Therefore, ne ≈ ND.
Since nenh = ni2, The number of holes
nh = (2.25 × 1032 )/(5 ×1022 )

477

Physics
14.5 p-n JUNCTION



A p-n junction is the basic building block of many semiconductor devices
like diodes, transistor, etc. A clear understanding of the junction behaviour
is important to analyse the working of other semiconductor devices.
We will now try to understand how a junction is formed and how the
junction behaves under the influence of external applied voltage (also
called bias).

14.5.1 p-n junction formation

Formation and working of p-n junction diode

Consider a thin p-type silicon (p-Si) semiconductor wafer. By adding
precisely a small quantity of pentavelent impurity, part of the p-Si wafer
can be converted into n-Si. There are several processes by which a
semiconductor can be formed. The wafer now contains p-region and
n-region and a metallurgical junction between p-, and n- region.
Two important processes occur during the formation of a p-n junction:
diffusion and drift. We know that in an n-type semiconductor, the
concentration of electrons (number of electrons per unit volume) is more
compared to the concentration of holes. Similarly, in a p-type
semiconductor, the concentration of holes is more than the concentration
of electrons. During the formation of p-n junction, and due to the
concentration gradient across p-, and n- sides, holes diffuse from p-side
to n-side (p → n) and electrons diffuse from n-side to p-side (n → p). This
motion of charge carries gives rise to diffusion current across the junction.
When an electron diffuses from n → p, it leaves behind an ionised
donor on n-side. This ionised donor (positive charge) is immobile as it is
bonded to the surrounding atoms. As the electrons continue to diffuse
from n → p, a layer of positive charge (or positive space-charge region) on
n-side of the junction is developed.
Similarly, when a hole diffuses from p → n due to the concentration
gradient, it leaves behind an ionised acceptor (negative charge) which is
immobile. As the holes continue to diffuse, a layer of negative charge (or
negative space-charge region) on the p-side of the junction is developed.
This space-charge region on either side of the junction together is known
as depletion region as the electrons and holes taking part in the initial
movement across the junction depleted the region of its
free charges (Fig. 14.10). The thickness of depletion region
is of the order of one-tenth of a micrometre. Due to the
positive space-charge region on n-side of the junction and
negative space charge region on p-side of the junction,
an electric field directed from positive charge towards
negative charge develops. Due to this field, an electron on
p-side of the junction moves to n-side and a hole on nside of the junction moves to p-side. The motion of charge
carriers due to the electric field is called drift. Thus a
FIGURE 14.10 p-n junction
drift current, which is opposite in direction to the diffusion
formation process.
478
current (Fig. 14.10) starts.
2022-23

Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
Initially, diffusion current is large and drift current is small.
As the diffusion process continues, the space-charge regions
on either side of the junction extend, thus increasing the electric
field strength and hence drift current. This process continues
until the diffusion current equals the drift current. Thus a p-n
junction is formed. In a p-n junction under equilibrium there
is no net current.
The loss of electrons from the n-region and the gain of
electron by the p-region causes a difference of potential across
the junction of the two regions. The polarity of this potential is
such as to oppose further flow of carriers so that a condition of
equilibrium exists. Figure 14.11 shows the p-n junction at
equilibrium and the potential across the junction. The
n-material has lost electrons, and p material has acquired
electrons. The n material is thus positive relative to the p
material. Since this potential tends to prevent the movement of
electron from the n region into the p region, it is often called a
barrier potential.

FIGURE 14.11 (a) Diode under
equilibrium (V = 0), (b) Barrier
potential under no bias.

EXAMPLE 14.3

Example 14.3 Can we take one slab of p-type semiconductor and
physically join it to another n-type semiconductor to get p-n junction?
Solution No! Any slab, howsoever flat, will have roughness much
larger than the inter-atomic crystal spacing (~2 to 3 Å) and hence
continuous contact at the atomic level will not be possible. The junction
will behave as a discontinuity for the flowing charge carriers.

14.6 SEMICONDUCTOR DIODE
A semiconductor diode [Fig. 14.12(a)] is basically a
p-n junction with metallic contacts provided at the
ends for the application of an external voltage. It is a
two terminal device. A p-n junction diode is
symbolically represented as shown in Fig. 14.12(b).
The direction of arrow indicates the conventional
direction of current (when the diode is under forward
bias). The equilibrium barrier potential can be altered
by applying an external voltage V across the diode.
The situation of p-n junction diode under equilibrium
(without bias) is shown in Fig. 14.11(a) and (b).

p

n

FIGURE 14.12 (a) Semiconductor diode,
(b) Symbol for p-n junction diode.

14.6.1 p-n junction diode under forward bias
When an external voltage V is applied across a semiconductor diode such
that p-side is connected to the positive terminal of the battery and n-side
to the negative terminal [Fig. 14.13(a)], it is said to be forward biased.
The applied voltage mostly drops across the depletion region and the
voltage drop across the p-side and n-side of the junction is negligible.
(This is because the resistance of the depletion region – a region where
there are no charges – is very high compared to the resistance of n-side
and p-side.) The direction of the applied voltage (V ) is opposite to the
2022-23

479

Physics

FIGURE 14.13 (a) p-n
junction diode under forward
bias, (b) Barrier potential
(1) without battery, (2) Low
battery voltage, and (3) High
voltage battery.

built-in potential V0. As a result, the depletion layer width
decreases and the barrier height is reduced [Fig. 14.13(b)]. The
effective barrier height under forward bias is (V0 – V ).
If the applied voltage is small, the barrier potential will be
reduced only slightly below the equilibrium value, and only a
small number of carriers in the material—those that happen to
be in the uppermost energy levels—will possess enough energy
to cross the junction. So the current will be small. If we increase
the applied voltage significantly, the barrier height will be reduced
and more number of carriers will have the required energy. Thus
the current increases.
Due to the applied voltage, electrons from n-side cross the
depletion region and reach p-side (where they are minority
carries). Similarly, holes from p-side cross the junction and reach
the n-side (where they are minority carries). This process under
forward bias is known as minority carrier injection. At the
junction boundary, on each side, the minority carrier
concentration increases significantly compared to the locations
far from the junction.
Due to this concentration gradient, the injected electrons on
p-side diffuse from the junction edge of p-side to the other end
of p-side. Likewise, the injected holes on n-side diffuse from the
junction edge of n-side to the other end of n-side
(Fig. 14.14). This motion of charged carriers on either side
gives rise to current. The total diode forward current is sum
of hole diffusion current and conventional current due to
electron diffusion. The magnitude of this current is usually
in mA.

14.6.2 p-n junction diode under reverse bias
FIGURE 14.14 Forward bias
minority carrier injection.

480

When an external voltage (V ) is applied across the diode such
that n-side is positive and p-side is negative, it is said to be
reverse biased [Fig.14.15(a)]. The applied voltage mostly
drops across the depletion region. The direction of applied voltage is same
as the direction of barrier potential. As a result, the barrier height increases
and the depletion region widens due to the change in the electric field.
The effective barrier height under reverse bias is (V0 + V ), [Fig. 14.15(b)].
This suppresses the flow of electrons from n → p and holes from p → n.
Thus, diffusion current, decreases enormously compared to the diode
under forward bias.
The electric field direction of the junction is such that if electrons on
p-side or holes on n-side in their random motion come close to the
junction, they will be swept to its majority zone. This drift of carriers
gives rise to current. The drift current is of the order of a few µA. This is
quite low because it is due to the motion of carriers from their minority
side to their majority side across the junction. The drift current is also
there under forward bias but it is negligible (µA) when compared with
current due to injected carriers which is usually in mA.
The diode reverse current is not very much dependent on the applied
voltage. Even a small voltage is sufficient to sweep the minority carriers
from one side of the junction to the other side of the junction. The current
2022-23

Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
is not limited by the magnitude of the applied voltage but is
limited due to the concentration of the minority carrier on either
side of the junction.
The current under reverse bias is essentially voltage
independent upto a critical reverse bias voltage, known as
breakdown voltage (Vbr ). When V = Vbr, the diode reverse current
increases sharply. Even a slight increase in the bias voltage causes
large change in the current. If the reverse current is not limited by
an external circuit below the rated value (specified by the
manufacturer) the p-n junction will get destroyed. Once it exceeds
the rated value, the diode gets destroyed due to overheating. This
can happen even for the diode under forward bias, if the forward
current exceeds the rated value.
The circuit arrangement for studying the V-I characteristics
of a diode, (i.e., the variation of current as a function of applied
FIGURE 14.15 (a) Diode
voltage) are shown in Fig. 14.16(a) and (b). The battery is connected
under reverse bias,
to the diode through a potentiometer (or reheostat) so that the
(b) Barrier potential under
applied voltage to the diode can be changed. For different values
reverse bias.
of voltages, the value of the current is noted. A graph between V
and I is obtained as in Fig. 14.16(c). Note that in forward bias
measurement, we use a milliammeter since the expected current is large
(as explained in the earlier section) while a micrometer is used in reverse
bias to measure the current. You can see in Fig. 14.16(c) that in forward

FIGURE 14.16 Experimental circuit arrangement for studying V-I characteristics of
a p-n junction diode (a) in forward bias, (b) in reverse bias. (c) Typical V-I
481
characteristics of a silicon diode.
2022-23

Physics
bias, the current first increases very slowly, almost negligibly, till the
voltage across the diode crosses a certain value. After the characteristic
voltage, the diode current increases significantly (exponentially), even for
a very small increase in the diode bias voltage. This voltage is called the
threshold voltage or cut-in voltage (~0.2V for germanium diode and
~0.7 V for silicon diode).
For the diode in reverse bias, the current is very small (~µA) and almost
remains constant with change in bias. It is called reverse saturation
current. However, for special cases, at very high reverse bias (break down
voltage), the current suddenly increases. This special action of the diode
is discussed later in Section 14.8. The general purpose diode are not
used beyond the reverse saturation current region.
The above discussion shows that the p-n junction diode primerly
allows the flow of current only in one direction (forward bias). The forward
bias resistance is low as compared to the reverse bias resistance. This
property is used for rectification of ac voltages as discussed in the next
section. For diodes, we define a quantity called dynamic resistance as
the ratio of small change in voltage ∆V to a small change in current ∆I:
rd =

∆V
∆I

(14.6)

Example 14.4 The V-I characteristic of a silicon diode is shown in
the Fig. 14.17. Calculate the resistance of the diode at (a) ID = 15 mA
and (b) VD = –10 V.

482

EXAMPLE 14.4

FIGURE 14.17

Solution Considering the diode characteristics as a straight line
between I = 10 mA to I = 20 mA passing through the origin, we can
calculate the resistance using Ohm’s law.
(a) From the curve, at I = 20 mA, V = 0.8 V; I = 10 mA, V = 0.7 V
rf b = ∆V/∆I = 0.1V/10 mA = 10 Ω
(b) From the curve at V = –10 V, I = –1 µA,
Therefore,
rrb = 10 V/1µA= 1.0 × 107 Ω
2022-23

Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits

14.7 APPLICATION OF JUNCTION DIODE AS A RECTIFIER
From the V-I characteristic of a junction diode we see that it allows current
to pass only when it is forward biased. So if an alternating voltage is
applied across a diode the current flows only in that part of the cycle
when the diode is forward biased. This property
is used to rectify alternating voltages and the
circuit used for this purpose is called a rectifier.
If an alternating voltage is applied across a
diode in series with a load, a pulsating voltage will
appear across the load only during the half cycles
of the ac input during which the diode is forward
biased. Such rectifier circuit, as shown in
Fig. 14.18, is called a half-wave rectifier. The
secondary of a transformer supplies the desired
ac voltage across terminals A and B. When the
voltage at A is positive, the diode is forward biased
and it conducts. When A is negative, the diode is
reverse-biased and it does not conduct. The reverse
saturation current of a diode is negligible and can
be considered equal to zero for practical purposes.
(The reverse breakdown voltage of the diode must
be sufficiently higher than the peak ac voltage at
the secondary of the transformer to protect the
diode from reverse breakdown.)
Therefore, in the positive half-cycle of ac there
FIGURE 14.18 (a) Half-wave rectifier
is a current through the load resistor RL and we
circuit, (b) Input ac voltage and output
get an output voltage, as shown in Fig. 14.18(b),
voltage waveforms from the rectifier circuit.
whereas there is no current in the negative halfcycle. In the next positive half-cycle, again we get
the output voltage. Thus, the output voltage, though still varying, is
restricted to only one direction and is said to be rectified. Since the
rectified output of this circuit is only for half of the input ac wave it is
called as half-wave rectifier.
The circuit using two diodes, shown in Fig. 14.19(a), gives output
rectified voltage corresponding to both the positive as well as negative
half of the ac cycle. Hence, it is known as full-wave rectifier. Here the
p-side of the two diodes are connected to the ends of the secondary of the
transformer. The n-side of the diodes are connected together and the
output is taken between this common point of diodes and the midpoint
of the secondary of the transformer. So for a full-wave rectifier the
secondary of the transformer is provided with a centre tapping and so it
is called centre-tap transformer. As can be seen from Fig.14.19(c) the
voltage rectified by each diode is only half the total secondary voltage.
Each diode rectifies only for half the cycle, but the two do so for alternate
cycles. Thus, the output between their common terminals and the centretap of the transformer becomes a full-wave rectifier output. (Note that
there is another circuit of full wave rectifier which does not need a centre483
tap transformer but needs four diodes.) Suppose the input voltage to A
2022-23

Physics
with respect to the centre tap at any instant
is positive. It is clear that, at that instant,
voltage at B being out of phase will be
negative as shown in Fig.14.19(b). So, diode
D1 gets forward biased and conducts (while
D2 being reverse biased is not conducting).
Hence, during this positive half cycle we get
an output current (and a output voltage
across the load resistor RL) as shown in
Fig.14.19(c). In the course of the ac cycle
when the voltage at A becomes negative with
respect to centre tap, the voltage at B would
be positive. In this part of the cycle diode
D1 would not conduct but diode D2 would,
giving an output current and output
voltage (across RL ) during the negative half
cycle of the input ac. Thus, we get output
voltage during both the positive as well as
the negative half of the cycle. Obviously,
this is a more efficient circuit for getting
rectified voltage or current than the halfwave rectifier.
The rectified voltage is in the form of
pulses of the shape of half sinusoids.
Though it is unidirectional it does not have
a steady value. To get steady dc output
from the pulsating voltage normally a
capacitor is connected across the output
terminals (parallel to the load RL). One can
also use an inductor in series with RL for
FIGURE 14.19 (a) A Full-wave rectifier
the same purpose. Since these additional
circuit; (b) Input wave forms given to the
circuits appear to filter out the ac ripple
diode D1 at A and to the diode D2 at B;
and give a pure dc voltage, so they are
(c) Output waveform across the
called
filters.
load RL connected in the full-wave
Now
we shall discuss the role of
rectifier circuit.
capacitor in filtering. When the voltage
across the capacitor is rising, it gets
charged. If there is no external load, it remains charged to the peak voltage
of the rectified output. When there is a load, it gets discharged through
the load and the voltage across it begins to fall. In the next half-cycle of
rectified output it again gets charged to the peak value (Fig. 14.20). The
rate of fall of the voltage across the capacitor depends inversely upon the
product of capacitance C and the effective resistance RL used in the circuit
and is called the time constant. To make the time constant large value of
C should be large. So capacitor input filters use large capacitors. The
output voltage obtained by using capacitor input filter is nearer to the
peak voltage of the rectified voltage. This type of filter is most widely
484
used in power supplies.
2022-23

Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits

FIGURE 14.20 (a) A full-wave rectifier with capacitor filter, (b) Input and output
voltage of rectifier in (a).

14.8 SPECIAL PURPOSE p-n JUNCTION DIODES
In the section, we shall discuss some devices which are basically junction
diodes but are developed for different applications.

14.8.1 Zener diode
It is a special purpose semiconductor diode, named after its inventor
C. Zener. It is designed to operate under reverse bias in the breakdown
region and used as a voltage regulator. The symbol for Zener diode is
shown in Fig. 14.21(a).
Zener diode is fabricated by heavily doping both p-, and
n- sides of the junction. Due to this, depletion region formed
is very thin (<10–6 m) and the electric field of the junction is
extremely high (~5×106 V/m) even for a small reverse bias
voltage of about 5V. The I-V characteristics of a Zener diode is
shown in Fig. 14.21(b). It is seen that when the applied reverse
bias voltage(V ) reaches the breakdown voltage (Vz ) of the Zener
diode, there is a large change in the current. Note that after
the breakdown voltage Vz, a large change in the current can
be produced by almost insignificant change in the reverse bias
voltage. In other words, Zener voltage remains constant, even
though current through the Zener diode varies over a wide
range. This property of the Zener diode is used for regulating
supply voltages so that they are constant.
Let us understand how reverse current suddenly increases
at the breakdown voltage. We know that reverse current is
due to the flow of electrons (minority carriers) from p → n and
holes from n → p. As the reverse bias voltage is increased, the
electric field at the junction becomes significant. When the
reverse bias voltage V = Vz, then the electric field strength is
high enough to pull valence electrons from the host atoms on
the p-side which are accelerated to n-side. These electrons
account for high current observed at the breakdown. The
FIGURE 14.21 Zener diode,
emission of electrons from the host atoms due to the high
(a) symbol, (b) I-V
electric field is known as internal field emission or field
characteristics.
ionisation. The electric field required for field ionisation is of
485
the order of 106 V/m.
2022-23

Physics
Zener diode as a voltage regulator
We know that when the ac input voltage of a rectifier fluctuates, its rectified
output also fluctuates. To get a constant dc voltage from the dc
unregulated output of a rectifier, we use a Zener diode. The circuit diagram
of a voltage regulator using a Zener diode is shown in Fig. 14.22.
The unregulated dc voltage (filtered output of a
rectifier) is connected to the Zener diode through a series
resistance Rs such that the Zener diode is reverse biased.
If the input voltage increases, the current through Rs
and Zener diode also increases. This increases the
voltage drop across Rs without any change in the
voltage across the Zener diode. This is because in the
breakdown region, Zener voltage remains constant even
though the current through the Zener diode changes.
Similarly, if the input voltage decreases, the current
through Rs and Zener diode also decreases. The voltage
drop across Rs decreases without any change in the
FIGURE 14.22 Zener diode as DC
voltage across the Zener diode. Thus any increase/
voltage regulator
decrease in the input voltage results in, increase/
decrease of the voltage drop across Rs without any
change in voltage across the Zener diode. Thus the Zener diode acts as a
voltage regulator. We have to select the Zener diode according to the
required output voltage and accordingly the series resistance Rs.

EXAMPLE 14.5

Example 14.5 In a Zener regulated power supply a Zener diode with
VZ = 6.0 V is used for regulation. The load current is to be 4.0 mA and
the unregulated input is 10.0 V. What should be the value of series
resistor RS?
Solution
The value of RS should be such that the current through the Zener
diode is much larger than the load current. This is to have good load
regulation. Choose Zener current as five times the load current, i.e.,
IZ = 20 mA. The total current through RS is, therefore, 24 mA. The
voltage drop across R S is 10.0 – 6.0 = 4.0 V. This gives
RS = 4.0V/(24 × 10–3) A = 167 Ω. The nearest value of carbon resistor
is 150 Ω. So, a series resistor of 150 Ω is appropriate. Note that slight
variation in the value of the resistor does not matter, what is important
is that the current IZ should be sufficiently larger than IL.

14.8.2 Optoelectronic junction devices

486

We have seen so far, how a semiconductor diode behaves under applied
electrical inputs. In this section, we learn about semiconductor diodes in
which carriers are generated by photons (photo-excitation). All these
devices are called optoelectronic devices. We shall study the functioning
of the following optoelectronic devices:
(i) Photodiodes used for detecting optical signal (photodetectors).
(ii) Light emitting diodes (LED) which convert electrical energy into light.
(iii) Photovoltaic devices which convert optical radiation into electricity
(solar cells).
2022-23

Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
(i) Photodiode
A Photodiode is again a special purpose p-n
junction diode fabricated with a transparent
window to allow light to fall on the diode. It is
operated under reverse bias. When the photodiode
is illuminated with light (photons) with energy (hν)
greater than the energy gap (E g ) of the
semiconductor, then electron-hole pairs are
generated due to the absorption of photons. The
diode is fabricated such that the generation of
e-h pairs takes place in or near the depletion region
of the diode. Due to electric field of the junction,
electrons and holes are separated before they
recombine. The direction of the electric field is such
that electrons reach n-side and holes reach p-side.
Electrons are collected on n-side and holes are
collected on p-side giving rise to an emf. When an
external load is connected, current flows. The
magnitude of the photocurrent depends on the
intensity of incident light (photocurrent is
proportional to incident light intensity).
It is easier to observe the change in the current
with change in the light intensity, if a reverse bias
is applied. Thus photodiode can be used as a
photodetector to detect optical signals. The circuit
diagram used for the measurement of I-V
characteristics of a photodiode is shown in
Fig. 14.23(a) and a typical I-V characteristics in
Fig. 14.23(b).

FIGURE 14.23 (a) An illuminated
photodiode under reverse bias , (b) I-V
characteristics of a photodiode for different
illumination intensity I4 > I3 > I2 > I1.

Example 14.6 The current in the forward bias is known to be more
(~mA) than the current in the reverse bias (~µA). What is the reason
then to operate the photodiodes in reverse bias?
Solution Consider the case of an n-type semiconductor. Obviously,
the majority carrier density (n) is considerably larger than the minority
hole density p (i.e., n >> p). On illumination, let the excess electrons
and holes generated be ∆n and ∆p, respectively:
p′ = p + ∆p
Here n ′ and p ′ are the electron and hole concentrations* at any
particular illumination and n and p are carriers concentration when
there is no illumination. Remember ∆n = ∆p and n >> p. Hence, the

* Note that, to create an e-h pair, we spend some energy (photoexcitation, thermal
excitation, etc.). Therefore when an electron and hole recombine the energy is
released in the form of light (radiative recombination) or heat (non-radiative
recombination). It depends on semiconductor and the method of fabrication of
the p-n junction. For the fabrication of LEDs, semiconductors like GaAs, GaAsGaP are used in which radiative recombination dominates.
2022-23

EXAMPLE 14.6

n′ = n + ∆n

487

EXAMPLE 14.6

Physics
fractional change in the majority carriers (i.e., ∆n/n ) would be much
less than that in the minority carriers (i.e., ∆p/p). In general, we can
state that the fractional change due to the photo-effects on the
minority carrier dominated reverse bias current is more easily
measurable than the fractional change in the forward bias current.
Hence, photodiodes are preferably used in the reverse bias condition
for measuring light intensity.

(ii) Light emitting diode

488

It is a heavily doped p-n junction which under forward bias emits
spontaneous radiation. The diode is encapsulated with a transparent
cover so that emitted light can come out.
When the diode is forward biased, electrons are sent from n → p (where
they are minority carriers) and holes are sent from p → n (where they are
minority carriers). At the junction boundary the concentration of minority
carriers increases compared to the equilibrium concentration (i.e., when
there is no bias). Thus at the junction boundary on either side of the
junction, excess minority carriers are there which recombine with majority
carriers near the junction. On recombination, the energy is released in
the form of photons. Photons with energy equal to or slightly less than
the band gap are emitted. When the forward current of the diode is small,
the intensity of light emitted is small. As the forward current increases,
intensity of light increases and reaches a maximum. Further increase in
the forward current results in decrease of light intensity. LEDs are biased
such that the light emitting efficiency is maximum.
The V-I characteristics of a LED is similar to that of a Si junction
diode. But the threshold voltages are much higher and slightly different
for each colour. The reverse breakdown voltages of LEDs are very low,
typically around 5V. So care should be taken that high reverse voltages
do not appear across them.
LEDs that can emit red, yellow, orange, green and blue light are
commercially available. The semiconductor used for fabrication of visible
LEDs must at least have a band gap of 1.8 eV (spectral range of visible
light is from about 0.4 µm to 0.7 µm, i.e., from about 3 eV to 1.8 eV). The
compound semiconductor Gallium Arsenide – Phosphide (GaAs1–x Px ) is
used for making LEDs of different colours. GaAs0.6 P0.4 (Eg ~ 1.9 eV) is
used for red LED. GaAs (Eg ~ 1.4 eV) is used for making infrared LED.
These LEDs find extensive use in remote controls, burglar alarm systems,
optical communication, etc. Extensive research is being done for
developing white LEDs which can replace incandescent lamps.
LEDs have the following advantages over conventional incandescent
low power lamps:
(i) Low operational voltage and less power.
(ii) Fast action and no warm-up time required.
(iii) The bandwidth of emitted light is 100 Å to 500 Å or in other words it
is nearly (but not exactly) monochromatic.
(iv) Long life and ruggedness.
(v) Fast on-off switching capability.
2022-23

Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
(iii) Solar cell
A solar cell is basically a p-n junction which
generates emf when solar radiation falls on the
p-n junction. It works on the same principle
(photovoltaic effect) as the photodiode, except that
no external bias is applied and the junction area
is kept much larger for solar radiation to be
incident because we are interested in more power.
A simple p-n junction solar cell is shown in
Fig. 14.24.
A p-Si wafer of about 300 µm is taken over
which a thin layer (~0.3 µm) of n-Si is grown on
one-side by diffusion process. The other side of
p-Si is coated with a metal (back contact). On the
top of n-Si layer, metal finger electrode (or metallic
FIGURE 14.24 (a) Typical p-n junction
grid) is deposited. This acts as a front contact. The
solar cell; (b) Cross-sectional view.
metallic grid occupies only a very small fraction
of the cell area (<15%) so that light can be incident
on the cell from the top.
The generation of emf by a solar cell, when light falls on, it is due to
the following three basic processes: generation, separation and collection—
(i) generation of e-h pairs due to light (with hν > Eg )
close to the junction; (ii) separation of electrons and
holes due to electric field of the depletion region.
Electrons are swept to n-side and holes to p-side;
(iii) the electrons reaching the n-side are collected by
the front contact and holes reaching p-side are collected
by the back contact. Thus p-side becomes positive and
n-side becomes negative giving rise to photovoltage.
When an external load is connected as shown in
the Fig. 14.25(a) a photocurrent IL flows through the
load. A typical I-V characteristics of a solar cell is shown
in the Fig. 14.25(b).
Note that the I – V characteristics of solar cell is
drawn in the fourth quadrant of the coordinate axes.
This is because a solar cell does not draw current but
supplies the same to the load.
Semiconductors with band gap close to 1.5 eV are
ideal materials for solar cell fabrication. Solar cells are
made with semiconductors like Si (Eg = 1.1 eV), GaAs
(Eg = 1.43 eV), CdTe (Eg = 1.45 eV), CuInSe2 (Eg = 1.04
eV), etc. The important criteria for the selection of a
material for solar cell fabrication are (i) band gap (~1.0
to 1.8 eV), (ii) high optical absorption (~104 cm–1), (iii)
electrical conductivity, (iv) availability of the raw
FIGURE 14.25 (a) A typical
material, and (v) cost. Note that sunlight is not always
illuminated
p-n junction solar cell;
required for a solar cell. Any light with photon energies
(b) I-V characteristics of a solar cell.
greater than the bandgap will do. Solar cells are used
to power electronic devices in satellites and space
vehicles and also as power supply to some calculators. Production of
low-cost photovoltaic cells for large-scale solar energy is a topic
489
for research.
2022-23

Physics
Example 14.7 Why are Si and GaAs are preferred materials for
solar cells?
Solution The solar radiation spectrum received by us is shown in
Fig. 14.26.

EXAMPLE 14.7

FIGURE 14.26

The maxima is near 1.5 eV. For photo-excitation, hν > Eg. Hence,
semiconductor with band gap ~1.5 eV or lower is likely to give better
solar conversion efficiency. Silicon has Eg ~ 1.1 eV while for GaAs it is
~1.53 eV. In fact, GaAs is better (in spite of its higher band gap) than
Si because of its relatively higher absorption coefficient. If we choose
materials like CdS or CdSe (Eg ~ 2.4 eV), we can use only the high
energy component of the solar energy for photo-conversion and a
significant part of energy will be of no use.
The question arises: why we do not use material like PbS (Eg ~ 0.4 eV)
which satisfy the condition hν > Eg for ν maxima corresponding to the
solar radiation spectra? If we do so, most of the solar radiation will be
absorbed on the top-layer of solar cell and will not reach in or near
the depletion region. For effective electron-hole separation, due to
the junction field, we want the photo-generation to occur in the
junction region only.

14.9 DIGITAL ELECTRONICS

490

AND

LOGIC GATES

In electronics circuits like amplifiers, oscillators, introduced to you in
earlier sections, the signal (current or voltage) has been in the form of
continuous, time-varying voltage or current. Such signals are called
continuous or analog signals. A typical analog signal is shown in Figure.
14.27(a). Fig. 14.27(b) shows a pulse waveform in which only discrete
values of voltages are possible. It is convenient to use binary numbers
to represent such signals. A binary number has only two digits ‘0’ (say,
0V) and ‘1’ (say, 5V). In digital electronics we use only these two levels of
voltage as shown in Fig. 14.27(b). Such signals are called Digital Signals.
2022-23

Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
In digital circuits only two values (represented by 0 or 1) of the input and
output voltage are permissible.
This section is intended to provide the first step in our understanding
of digital electronics. We shall restrict our study to some basic building
blocks of digital electronics (called Logic Gates) which process the digital
signals in a specific manner. Logic gates are used in calculators, digital
watches, computers, robots, industrial control systems, and in
telecommunications.
A light switch in your house can be used as an example of a digital
circuit. The light is either ON or OFF depending on the switch position.
When the light is ON, the output value is ‘1’. When the light is OFF the
output value is ‘0’. The inputs are the position of the light switch. The
switch is placed either in the ON or OFF position to activate the light.

FIGURE 14.27 (a) Analog signal, (b) Digital signal.

14.9.1 Logic gates
A gate is a digital circuit that follows curtain logical relationship
between the input and output voltages. Therefore, they are generally
known as logic gates — gates because they control the flow of
information. The five common logic gates used are NOT, AND, OR,
NAND, NOR. Each logic gate is indicated by a symbol and its function
Input
Output
is defined by a truth table that shows all the possible input logic level
combinations with their respective output logic levels. Truth tables
A
Y
help understand the behaviour of logic gates. These logic gates can be
realised using semiconductor devices.
0
1
(i) NOT gate
This is the most basic gate, with one input and one output. It produces
1
0
a ‘1’ output if the input is ‘0’ and vice-versa. That is, it produces an
(b)
inverted version of the input at its output. This is why it is also known
FIGURE 14.28
as an inverter. The commonly used symbol together with the truth
(a) Logic symbol,
table for this gate is given in Fig. 14.28.
(b) Truth table of
(ii) OR Gate
NOT gate.
An OR gate has two or more inputs with one output. The logic symbol
and truth table are shown in Fig. 14.29. The output Y is 1 when either
input A or input B or both are 1s, that is, if any of the input is high, the
491
output is high.
2022-23

Physics
Input

Output

A

B

Y

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

0

1

1

1

1
(b)

FIGURE 14.29 (a) Logic symbol (b) Truth table of OR gate.

Apart from carrying out the above mathematical logic operation, this
gate can be used for modifying the pulse waveform as explained in the
following example.
Example 14.8 Justify the output waveform (Y) of the OR gate for the
following inputs A and B given in Fig. 14.30.

EXAMPLE 14.8

Solution Note the following:
A = 0, B = 0;
• At t < t1;
A = 1, B = 0;
• For t1 to t2;
A = 1, B = 1;
• For t2 to t3;
A = 0, B = 1;
• For t3 to t4;
A = 0, B = 0;
• For t4 to t5;
A = 1, B = 0;
• For t5 to t6;
A = 0, B = 1;
• For t > t6;
Therefore the waveform Y will be

Input

Output

A

B

Y

0

0

0

0

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

1

Hence Y = 0
Hence Y = 1
Hence Y = 1
Hence Y = 1
Hence Y = 0
Hence Y = 1
Hence Y = 1
as shown in the Fig. 14.30.

FIGURE 14.30

(iii) AND Gate
An AND gate has two or more inputs and one output. The output Y of
AND gate is 1 only when input A and input B are both 1. The logic
symbol and truth table for this gate are given in Fig. 14.31

(b)

492

FIGURE 14.31 (a) Logic symbol, (b) Truth table of AND gate.
2022-23

Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
Example 14.9 Take A and B input waveforms similar to that in
Example 14.8. Sketch the output waveform obtained from AND gate.
Solution
A = 0, B = 0;
• For t ≤ t1;
A = 1, B = 0;
• For t1 to t2;
A = 1, B = 1;
• For t2 to t3;
A = 0, B = 1;
• For t3 to t4;
A = 0, B = 0;
• For t4 to t5;
A = 1, B = 0;
• For t5 to t6;
A = 0, B = 1;
• For t > t6;
Based on the above, the output waveform for AND gate
as given below.

Hence Y = 0
Hence Y = 0
Hence Y = 1
Hence Y = 0
Hence Y = 0
Hence Y = 0
Hence Y = 0
can be drawn

EXAMPLE 14.9

FIGURE 14.32

(iv) NAND Gate
This is an AND gate followed by a NOT gate. If inputs A and B are both
‘1’, the output Y is not ‘1’. The gate gets its name from this NOT AND
behaviour. Figure 14.33 shows the symbol and truth table of NAND gate.
NAND gates are also called Universal Gates since by using these
gates you can realise other basic gates like OR, AND and NOT (Exercises
14.12 and 14.13).
Input
Output
A

B

Y

0

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

1

1

0

(b)

FIGURE 14.33 (a) Logic symbol, (b) Truth table of NAND gate.

Solution
• For t < t1;
• For t1 to t2;
• For t2 to t3;
• For t3 to t4;

A
A
A
A

=
=
=
=

1,
0,
0,
1,

B
B
B
B

=
=
=
=

1;
0;
1;
0;

Hence
Hence
Hence
Hence

Y
Y
Y
Y

=
=
=
=

0
1
1
1
2022-23

EXAMPLE 14.10

Example 14.10 Sketch the output Y from a NAND gate having inputs
A and B given below:

493

Physics
A = 1, B = 1;
A = 0, B = 0;
A = 0, B = 1;

EXAMPLE 14.10

• For t4 to t5;
• For t5 to t6;
• For t > t6;

Hence Y = 0
Hence Y = 1
Hence Y = 1

FIGURE 14.34

(v) NOR Gate
It has two or more inputs and one output. A NOT- operation applied
after OR gate gives a NOT-OR gate (or simply NOR gate). Its output Y is
‘1’ only when both inputs A and B are ‘0’, i.e., neither one input nor the
other is ‘1’. The symbol and truth table for NOR gate is given in
Fig. 14.35.
Input
Output
A

B

Y

0

0

1

0

1

0

1

0

0

1

1

0

(b)

FIGURE 14.35 (a) Logic symbol, (b) Truth table of NOR gate.

NOR gates are considered as universal gates because you can obtain
all the gates like AND, OR, NOT by using only NOR gates (Exercises 14.14
and 14.15).

FASTER

AND SMALLER: THE FUTURE OF COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY

The Integrated Chip (IC) is at the heart of all computer systems. In fact ICs are found in
almost all electrical devices like cars, televisions, CD players, cell phones etc. The
miniaturisation that made the modern personal computer possible could never have
happened without the IC. ICs are electronic devices that contain many transistors, resistors,
capacitors, connecting wires – all in one package. You must have heard of the

494
2022-23

Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
microprocessor. The microprocessor is an IC that processes all information in a computer,
like keeping track of what keys are pressed, running programmes, games etc. The IC was
first invented by Jack Kilky at Texas Instruments in 1958 and he was awarded Nobel Prize
for this in 2000. ICs are produced on a piece of semiconductor crystal (or chip) by a process
called photolithography. Thus, the entire Information Technology (IT) industry hinges on
semiconductors. Over the years, the complexity of ICs has increased while the size of its
features continued to shrink. In the past five decades, a dramatic miniaturisation in
computer technology has made modern day computers faster and smaller. In the 1970s,
Gordon Moore, co-founder of INTEL, pointed out that the memory capacity of a chip (IC)
approximately doubled every one and a half years. This is popularly known as Moore’s
law. The number of transistors per chip has risen exponentially and each year computers
are becoming more powerful, yet cheaper than the year before. It is intimated from current
trends that the computers available in 2020 will operate at 40 GHz (40,000 MHz) and
would be much smaller, more efficient and less expensive than present day computers.
The explosive growth in the semiconductor industry and computer technology is best
expressed by a famous quote from Gordon Moore: “If the auto industry advanced as rapidly
as the semiconductor industry, a Rolls Royce would get half a million miles per gallon, and
it would be cheaper to throw it away than to park it”.

SUMMARY
1.
2.

3.

4.
5.

6.

7.
8.

9.

Semiconductors are the basic materials used in the present solid state
electronic devices like diode, transistor, ICs, etc.
Lattice structure and the atomic structure of constituent elements
decide whether a particular material will be insulator, metal or
semiconductor.
Metals have low resistivity (10–2 to 10–8 Ω m), insulators have very high
resistivity (>108 Ω m–1), while semiconductors have intermediate values
of resistivity.
Semiconductors are elemental (Si, Ge) as well as compound (GaAs,
CdS, etc.).
Pure semiconductors are called ‘intrinsic semiconductors’. The presence
of charge carriers (electrons and holes) is an ‘intrinsic’ property of the
material and these are obtained as a result of thermal excitation. The
number of electrons (ne ) is equal to the number of holes (nh ) in intrinsic
conductors. Holes are essentially electron vacancies with an effective
positive charge.
The number of charge carriers can be changed by ‘doping’ of a suitable
impurity in pure semiconductors. Such semiconductors are known as
extrinsic semiconductors. These are of two types (n-type and p-type).
In n-type semiconductors, ne >> nh while in p-type semiconductors nh >> ne.
n-type semiconducting Si or Ge is obtained by doping with pentavalent
atoms (donors) like As, Sb, P, etc., while p-type Si or Ge can be obtained
by doping with trivalent atom (acceptors) like B, Al, In etc.
nenh = ni2 in all cases. Further, the material possesses an overall charge
neutrality.

495
2022-23

Physics
10. There are two distinct band of energies (called valence band and
conduction band) in which the electrons in a material lie. Valence
band energies are low as compared to conduction band energies. All
energy levels in the valence band are filled while energy levels in the
conduction band may be fully empty or partially filled. The electrons in
the conduction band are free to move in a solid and are responsible for
the conductivity. The extent of conductivity depends upon the energy
gap (Eg ) between the top of valence band (EV ) and the bottom of the
conduction band EC. The electrons from valence band can be excited by
heat, light or electrical energy to the conduction band and thus, produce
a change in the current flowing in a semiconductor.
11. For insulators Eg > 3 eV, for semiconductors Eg is 0.2 eV to 3 eV, while
for metals Eg ≈ 0.
12. p-n junction is the ‘key’ to all semiconductor devices. When such a
junction is made, a ‘depletion layer’ is formed consisting of immobile
ion-cores devoid of their electrons or holes. This is responsible for a
junction potential barrier.
13. By changing the external applied voltage, junction barriers can be
changed. In forward bias (n-side is connected to negative terminal of the
battery and p-side is connected to the positive), the barrier is decreased
while the barrier increases in reverse bias. Hence, forward bias current
is more (mA) while it is very small (µA) in a p-n junction diode.
14. Diodes can be used for rectifying an ac voltage (restricting the ac voltage
to one direction). With the help of a capacitor or a suitable filter, a dc
voltage can be obtained.
15. There are some special purpose diodes.
16. Zener diode is one such special purpose diode. In reverse bias, after a
certain voltage, the current suddenly increases (breakdown voltage) in
a Zener diode. This property has been used to obtain voltage regulation.
17. p-n junctions have also been used to obtain many photonic or
optoelectronic devices where one of the participating entity is ‘photon’:
(a) Photodiodes in which photon excitation results in a change of reverse
saturation current which helps us to measure light intensity; (b) Solar
cells which convert photon energy into electricity; (c) Light Emitting
Diode and Diode Laser in which electron excitation by a bias voltage
results in the generation of light.
18. There are some special circuits which handle the digital data consisting
of 0 and 1 levels. This forms the subject of Digital Electronics.
19. The important digital circuits performing special logic operations are
called logic gates. These are: OR, AND, NOT, NAND, and NOR gates.

POINTS TO PONDER
1.

2.

496

The energy bands (EC or EV ) in the semiconductors are space delocalised
which means that these are not located in any specific place inside the
solid. The energies are the overall averages. When you see a picture in
which EC or EV are drawn as straight lines, then they should be
respectively taken simply as the bottom of conduction band energy levels
and top of valence band energy levels.
In elemental semiconductors (Si or Ge), the n-type or p-type
semiconductors are obtained by introducing ‘dopants’ as defects. In
compound semiconductors, the change in relative stoichiometric ratio
can also change the type of semiconductor. For example, in ideal GaAs
2022-23

Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits

3.

the ratio of Ga:As is 1:1 but in Ga-rich or As-rich GaAs it could
respectively be Ga1.1 As0.9 or Ga0.9 As1.1. In general, the presence of
defects control the properties of semiconductors in many ways.
In modern day circuit, many logical gates or circuits are integrated in
one single ‘Chip’. These are known as Intgrated circuits (IC).

EXERCISES
14.1

14.2
14.3

14.4

14.5

14.6

14.7

In an n-type silicon, which of the following statement is true:
(a) Electrons are majority carriers and trivalent atoms are the
dopants.
(b) Electrons are minority carriers and pentavalent atoms are the
dopants.
(c) Holes are minority carriers and pentavalent atoms are the
dopants.
(d) Holes are majority carriers and trivalent atoms are the dopants.
Which of the statements given in Exercise 14.1 is true for p-type
semiconductos.
Carbon, silicon and germanium have four valence electrons each.
These are characterised by valence and conduction bands separated
by energy band gap respectively equal to (Eg)C, (Eg)Si and (Eg)Ge. Which
of the following statements is true?
(a) (Eg)Si < (Eg)Ge < (Eg)C
(b) (Eg)C < (Eg)Ge > (Eg)Si
(c) (Eg)C > (Eg)Si > (Eg)Ge
(d) (Eg)C = (Eg)Si = (Eg)Ge
In an unbiased p-n junction, holes diffuse from the p-region to
n-region because
(a) free electrons in the n-region attract them.
(b) they move across the junction by the potential difference.
(c) hole concentration in p-region is more as compared to n-region.
(d) All the above.
When a forward bias is applied to a p-n junction, it
(a) raises the potential barrier.
(b) reduces the majority carrier current to zero.
(c) lowers the potential barrier.
(d) None of the above.
In half-wave rectification, what is the output frequency if the input
frequency is 50 Hz. What is the output frequency of a full-wave rectifier
for the same input frequency.
A p-n photodiode is fabricated from a semiconductor with band gap
of 2.8 eV. Can it detect a wavelength of 6000 nm?

497
2022-23

Physics
ADDITIONAL EXERCISES
14.8

14.9

The number of silicon atoms per m 3 is 5 × 1028. This is doped
simultaneously with 5 × 1022 atoms per m3 of Arsenic and 5 × 1020
per m3 atoms of Indium. Calculate the number of electrons and holes.
Given that ni = 1.5 × 1016 m–3. Is the material n-type or p-type?
In an intrinsic semiconductor the energy gap Eg is 1.2eV. Its hole
mobility is much smaller than electron mobility and independent of
temperature. What is the ratio between conductivity at 600K and
that at 300K? Assume that the temperature dependence of intrinsic
carrier concentration ni is given by

where n0 is a constant.
14.10 In a p-n junction diode, the current I can be expressed as

where I 0 is called the reverse saturation current, V is the voltage
across the diode and is positive for forward bias and negative for
reverse bias, and I is the current through the diode, k B is the
Boltzmann constant (8.6×10 –5 eV/K) and T is the absolute
temperature. If for a given diode I0 = 5 × 10–12 A and T = 300 K, then
(a) What will be the forward current at a forward voltage of 0.6 V?
(b) What will be the increase in the current if the voltage across the
diode is increased to 0.7 V?
(c) What is the dynamic resistance?
(d) What will be the current if reverse bias voltage changes from 1 V
to 2 V?
14.11 You are given the two circuits as shown in Fig. 14.36. Show that
circuit (a) acts as OR gate while the circuit (b) acts as AND gate.

FIGURE 14.36

14.12 Write the truth table for a NAND gate connected as given in
Fig. 14.37.

FIGURE 14.37

498

Hence identify the exact logic operation carried out by this circuit.
2022-23

Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
14.13 You are given two circuits as shown in Fig. 14.38, which consist
of NAND gates. Identify the logic operation carried out by the two
circuits.

FIGURE 14.38

14.14 Write the truth table for circuit given in Fig. 14.39 below consisting
of NOR gates and identify the logic operation (OR, AND, NOT) which
this circuit is performing.

FIGURE 14.39

(Hint: A = 0, B = 1 then A and B inputs of second NOR gate will be 0
and hence Y=1. Similarly work out the values of Y for other
combinations of A and B. Compare with the truth table of OR, AND,
NOT gates and find the correct one.)
14.15 Write the truth table for the circuits given in Fig. 14.40 consisting of
NOR gates only. Identify the logic operations (OR, AND, NOT) performed
by the two circuits.

FIGURE 14.40

499
2022-23

Physics

ANSWERS

CHAPTER 9
9.1
9.2
9.3

v = –54 cm. The image is real, inverted and magnified. The size of the
image is 5.0 cm. As u → f, v → ∞; for u < f, image is virtual.
v = 6.7 cm. Magnification = 5/9, i.e., the size of the image is 2.5 cm. As
u → ∞; v → f (but never beyond) while m → 0.
1.33; 1.7 cm

9.4

nga = 1.51; n wa = 1.32; ngw = 1.144; which gives sin r = 0.6181 i.e.,
r ~ 38°.

9.5

r = 0.8 × tan ic and sin i c = 1/1.33 ≅ 0.75 , where r is the radius (in m)
of the largest circle from which light comes out and ic is the critical
angle for water-air interface, Area = 2.6 m2
n ≅ 1.53 and Dm for prism in water ≅ 10°
R = 22 cm
Here the object is virtual and the image is real. u = +12 cm (object on
right; virtual)
(a) f = +20 cm. Image is real and at 7.5 cm from the lens on its right
side.
(b) f = –16 cm. Image is real and at 48 cm from the lens on its right
side.
v = 8.4 cm, image is erect and virtual. It is diminished to a size
1.8 cm. As u → ∞, v → f (but never beyond f while m → 0).
Note that when the object is placed at the focus of the concave lens
(21 cm), the image is located at 10.5 cm (not at infinity as one might
wrongly think).
A diverging lens of focal length 60 cm
(a) ve = –25 cm and fe = 6.25 cm give ue = –5 cm; vO = (15 – 5) cm =
10 cm,
fO = u O = – 2.5 cm; Magnifying power = 20
(b) u O = – 2.59 cm.
Magnifying power = 13.5.
Angular magnification of the eye-piece for image at 25 cm

9.6
9.7
9.8

9.9

9.10
9.11

9.12

502

25

25
cm = 2.27cm ; vO = 7.2 cm
11
2.5
Separation = 9.47 cm; Magnifying power = 88
=

+ 1 = 11; | u e |=

2022-23

Answers
9.13
9.14
9.15

9.16

9.17

24; 150 cm
(a) Angular magnification = 1500
(b) Diameter of the image = 13.7 cm.
Apply mirror equation and the condition:
(a) f < 0 (concave mirror); u < 0 (object on left)
(b) f > 0; u < 0
(c) f > 0 (convex mirror) and u < 0
(d) f < 0 (concave mirror); f < u < 0
to deduce the desired result.
The pin appears raised by 5.0 cm. It can be seen with an explicit ray
diagram that the answer is independent of the location of the slab
(for small angles of incidence).
(a) sin ic′ = 1.44/1.68 which gives ic′ = 59°. Total internal reflection
takes place when i > 59° or when r < r max = 31°. Now,
(sin i

9.18

9.19

9.20

max

/sin r

max

) = 1.68 , which gives i
max

~

60°. Thus, all

incident rays of angles in the range 0 < i < 60° will suffer total
internal reflections in the pipe. (If the length of the pipe is
finite, which it is in practice, there will be a lower limit on i
determined by the ratio of the diameter to the length of the
pipe.)
(b) If there is no outer coating, ic′ = sin –1(1/1.68) = 36.5°. Now,
i = 90° will have r = 36.5° and i ′ = 53.5° which is greater than
ic′. Thus, all incident rays (in the range 53.5° < i < 90°) will
suffer total internal reflections.
(a) Rays converging to a point ‘behind’ a plane or convex mirror are
reflected to a point in front of the mirror on a screen. In other
words, a plane or convex mirror can produce a real image if the
object is virtual. Convince yourself by drawing an appropriate
ray diagram.
(b) When the reflected or refracted rays are divergent, the image is
virtual. The divergent rays can be converged on to a screen by
means of an appropriate converging lens. The convex lens of the
eye does just that. The virtual image here serves as an object for
the lens to produce a real image. Note, the screen here is not
located at the position of the virtual image. There is no contradiction.
(c) Taller
(d) The apparent depth for oblique viewing decreases from its value
for near-normal viewing. Convince yourself of this fact by drawing ray diagrams for different positions of the observer.
(e) Refractive index of a diamond is about 2.42, much larger than
that of ordinary glass (about 1.5). The critical angle of diamond
is about 24°, much less than that of glass. A skilled diamondcutter exploits the larger range of angles of incidence (in the
diamond), 24° to 90°, to ensure that light entering the diamond
is totally reflected from many faces before getting out–thus
producing a sparkling effect.
For fixed distance s between object and screen, the lens equation
does not give a real solution for u or v if f is greater than s/4.
Therefore, fmax = 0.75 m.
21.4 cm
2022-23

503

Physics
9.21

(a) (i) Let a parallel beam be the incident from the left on the convex
lens first.
f1 = 30 cm and u1 = – ∞ , give v1 = + 30 cm. This image becomes
a virtual object for the second lens.
f 2 = –20 cm, u 2 = + (30 – 8) cm = + 22 cm which gives,
v2 = – 220 cm. The parallel incident beam appears to diverge
from a point 216 cm from the centre of the two-lens system.
(ii) Let the parallel beam be incident from the left on the concave
lens first: f1 = – 20 cm, u1 = – ∞, give v1 = – 20 cm. This image
becomes a real object for the second lens: f2 = + 30 cm, u2 =
– (20 + 8) cm = – 28 cm which gives, v2 = – 420 cm. The parallel
incident beam appears to diverge from a point 416 cm on the
left of the centre of the two-lens system.
Clearly, the answer depends on which side of the lens system
the parallel beam is incident. Further we do not have a simple lens
equation true for all u (and v) in terms of a definite constant of the
system (the constant being determined by f1 and f2, and the separation
between the lenses). The notion of effective focal length, therefore,
does not seem to be meaningful for this system.
(b) u1 = – 40 cm, f1 = 30 cm, gives v1= 120 cm.
Magnitude of magnification due to the first (convex) lens is 3.
u 2 = + (120 – 8) cm = +112 cm (object virtual);

f2 = – 20 cm which gives v2 = −

112 × 20
cm
92

9.22

Magnitude of magnification due to the second (concave)
lens = 20/92.
Net magnitude of magnification = 0.652
Size of the image = 0.98 cm
If the refracted ray in the prism is incident on the second face at the
critical angle ic, the angle of refraction r at the first face is (60°–ic).
Now, ic = sin–1 (1/1.524) ~ 41°
Therefore, r = 19°
sin i = 0.4962; i ~ 30°

9.23

(a)

1 1
1
+ =
v 9 10

i.e.,
v = – 90 cm,
Magnitude of magnification = 90/9 = 10.
Each square in the virtual image has an area 10 × 10 × 1 mm2
= 100 mm2 = 1 cm2
(b) Magnifying power = 25/9 = 2.8
(c) No, magnification of an image by a lens and angular magnification
(or magnifying power) of an optical instrument are two separate
things. The latter is the ratio of the angular size of the object
(which is equal to the angular size of the image even if the image
is magnified) to the angular size of the object if placed at the near
point (25 cm). Thus, magnification magnitude is |(v/u )| and
magnifying power is (25/ |u|). Only when the image is located at
the near point |v| = 25 cm, are the two quantities equal.

504
2022-23

Answers
9.24

(a) Maximum magnifying power is obtained when the image is at
the near point (25 cm)
u = – 7.14 cm.
(b) Magnitude of magnification = (25/ |u|) = 3.5.
(c) Magnifying power = 3.5
Yes, the magnifying power (when the image is produced at 25 cm)
is equal to the magnitude of magnification.

9.25

Magnification =

(6.25 / 1) = 2.5

v = +2.5u

+

9.26

1
2.5u

−

1

=

u

1
10

i.e.,u = – 6 cm
|v| = 15 cm
The virtual image is closer than the normal near point (25 cm) and
cannot be seen by the eye distinctly.
(a) Even though the absolute image size is bigger than the object
size, the angular size of the image is equal to the angular size of
the object. The magnifier helps in the following way: without it
object would be placed no closer than 25 cm; with it the object
can be placed much closer. The closer object has larger angular
size than the same object at 25 cm. It is in this sense that angular
magnification is achieved.
(b) Yes, it decreases a little because the angle subtended at the eye
is then slightly less than the angle subtended at the lens. The
effect is negligible if the image is at a very large distance away.
[Note: When the eye is separated from the lens, the angles
subtended at the eye by the first object and its image are not
equal.]
(c) First, grinding lens of very small focal length is not easy. More
important, if you decrease focal length, aberrations ( both spherical
and chromatic ) become more pronounced. So, in practice, you
cannot get a magnifying power of more than 3 or so with a simple
convex lens. However, using an aberration corrected lens system,
one can increase this limit by a factor of 10 or so.
(d) Angular magnification of eye-piece is [( 25/fe ) + 1] ( fe in cm) which
increases if fe is smaller. Further, magnification of the objective
is given by

vO
|u O |

=

1
(|u O |/ f O ) − 1

|u O | is slightly greater than fO. The microscope is used for viewing very close object. So |u O | is small, and

which is large when

(e)

so is fO.
The image of the objective in the eye-piece is known as ‘eye-ring’.
All the rays from the object refracted by objective go through the
eye-ring. Therefore, it is an ideal position for our eyes for viewing.
If we place our eyes too close to the eye-piece, we shall not collect
much of the light and also reduce our field of view. If we position

505
2022-23

Physics

9.27

our eyes on the eye-ring and the area of the pupil of our eye is
greater or equal to the area of the eye-ring, our eyes will collect
all the light refracted by the objective. The precise location of
the eye-ring naturally depends on the separation between the
objective and the eye-piece. When you view through a microscope
by placing your eyes on one end,the ideal distance between the
eyes and eye-piece is usually built-in the design of the
instrument.
Assume microscope in normal use i.e., image at 25 cm. Angular
magnification of the eye-piece
=

25

+1 = 6
5
Magnification of the objective
=

30
6

=5

1
1
1
−
=
5u O u O 1.25

which gives uO= –1.5 cm; v0= 7.5 cm. |u e|= (25/6) cm = 4.17 cm. The
separation between the objective and the eye-piece should be (7.5 +
4.17) cm = 11.67 cm. Further the object should be placed 1.5 cm from
the objective to obtain the desired magnification.
9.28

(a) m = ( fO/fe ) = 28

9.29

fO 

1 + 25  = 33.6
(a) fO + fe = 145 cm

(b) m =

fO
fe

(b) Angle subtended by the tower = (100/3000) = (1/30) rad.
Angle subtended by the image produced by the objective
=

h
h
=
f O 140

Equating the two, h = 4.7 cm.
(c)

Magnification (magnitude) of the eye-piece = 6. Height of the
final image (magnitude) = 28 cm.

9.30

The image formed by the larger (concave) mirror acts as virtual object
for the smaller (convex) mirror. Parallel rays coming from the object
at infinity will focus at a distance of 110 mm from the larger mirror.
The distance of virtual object for the smaller mirror = (110 – 20) =
90 mm. The focal length of smaller mirror is 70 mm. Using the mirror
formula, image is formed at 315 mm from the smaller mirror.

9.31

The reflected rays get deflected by twice the angle of rotation of the
mirror. Therefore, d/1.5 = tan 7°. Hence d = 18.4 cm.

9.32

n = 1.33

506
2022-23

Answers
CHAPTER 10
10.1

(a) Reflected light: (wavelength, frequency, speed same as incident
light)

λ = 589 nm, ν = 5.09 × 1014 Hz, c = 3.00 × 108 m s–1
(b) Refracted light: (frequency same as the incident frequency)
ν = 5.09 × 1014Hz
v = (c/n) = 2.26 × 108 m s–1, λ = (v/ν ) = 444 nm
10.2

(a) Spherical
(b) Plane
(c) Plane (a small area on the surface of a large sphere is nearly
planar).

10.3

(a) 2.0 × 108 m s–1
(b) No. The refractive index, and hence the speed of light in a
medium, depends on wavelength. [When no particular
wavelength or colour of light is specified, we may take the given
refractive index to refer to yellow colour.] Now we know violet
colour deviates more than red in a glass prism, i.e. n v > nr.
Therefore, the violet component of white light travels slower than
the red component.

10.4

λ=

10.5

K/4

10.6

(a) 1.17 mm

10.7

0.15°

10.8

tan–1(1.5) ~ 56.3o

10.9

5000 Å, 6 × 1014 Hz; 45°

–2

1.2 ×10 × 0.28 ×10

–3

4 ×1.4

m = 600 nm

(b) 1.56 mm

10.10 40 m
10.11 Use the formula λ′ – λ =
i.e., v =

c

λ

( λ' − λ) =

v

λ

c

3 × 108 × 15
= 6.86 × 105 m s–1
6563

10.12 In corpuscular (particle) picture of refraction, particles of light
incident from a rarer to a denser medium experience a force of
attraction normal to the surface. This results in an increase in the
normal component of the velocity but the component along the surface
is unchanged. This means
c sin i = v sin r

or

v

sin i

= n . Since n > 1, v > c.
c sin r
The prediction is opposite to the experimental results (v < c ). The
wave picture of light is consistent with the experiment.
=

507
2022-23

Physics
10.13 With the point object at the centre, draw a circle touching the mirror.
This is a plane section of the spherical wavefront from the object
that has just reached the mirror. Next draw the locations of this
same wavefront after a time t in the presence of the mirror, and in
the absence of the mirror. You will get two arcs symmetrically located
on either side of the mirror. Using simple geometry, the centre of the
reflected wavefront (the image of the object) is seen to be at the same
distance from the mirror as the object.

508

10.14 (a) The speed of light in vacuum is a universal constant independent
of all the factors listed and anything else. In particular, note the
surprising fact that it is independent of the relative motion
between the source and the observer. This fact is a basic axiom
of Einstein’s special theory of relativity.
(b) Dependence of the speed of light in a medium:
(i) does not depend on the nature of the source (wave speed is
determined by the properties of the medium of propagation.
This is also true for other waves, e.g., sound waves, water
waves, etc.).
(ii) independent of the direction of propagation for isotropic
media.
(iii) independent of the motion of the source relative to the
medium but depends on the motion of the observer relative
to the medium.
(iv) depends on wavelength.
(v) independent of intensity. [For high intensity beams,
however, the situation is more complicated and need not
concern us here.]
10.15 Sound waves require a medium for propagation. Thus even though
the situations (i) and (ii) may correspond to the same relative motion
(between the source and the observer), they are not identical
physically since the motion of the observer relative to the medium
is different in the two situations. Therefore, we cannot expect
Doppler formulas for sound to be identical for (i) and (ii). For light
waves in vacuum, there is clearly nothing to distinguish between
(i) and (ii). Here only the relative motion between the source and the
observer counts and the relativistic Doppler formula is the same for
(i) and (ii). For light propagation in a medium, once again like for
sound waves, the two situations are not identical and we should
expect the Doppler formulas for this case to be different for the two
situations (i) and (ii).
10.16 3.4 × 10 – 4 m.
10.17 (a) The size reduces by half according to the relation: size ~ λ/d.
Intensity increases four fold.
(b) The intensity of interference fringes in a double-slit arrangement
is modulated by the diffraction pattern of each slit.
(c) Waves diffracted from the edge of the circular obstacle interfere
constructively at the centre of the shadow producing a bright
spot.
(d) For diffraction or bending of waves by obstacles/apertures by a
large angle, the size of the latter should be comparable to
wavelength. If the size of the obstacle/aperture is much too large
compared to wavelength, diffraction is by a small angle. Here
the size is of the order of a few metres. The wavelength of light is
about 5 × 10–7 m, while sound waves of, say, 1 kHz frequency
2022-23

Answers
(e)

have wavelength of about 0.3 m. Thus, sound waves can bend
around the partition while light waves cannot.
Justification based on what is explained in (d). Typical sizes of
apertures involved in ordinary optical instruments are much
larger than the wavelength of light.

10.18 12.5 cm.
10.19 0.2 nm.
10.20 (a) Interference of the direct signal received by the antenna with
the (weak) signal reflected by the passing aircraft.
(b) Superposition principle follows from the linear character of the
(differential) equation governing wave motion. If y 1 and y2 are
solutions of the wave equation, so is any linear combination of
y1 and y2. When the amplitudes are large (e.g., high intensity laser
beams) and non-linear effects are important, the situation is far
more complicated and need not concern us here.
10.21 Divide the single slit into n smaller slits of width a ′ = a/n . The angle
θ = n λ/a = λ/a ′. Each of the smaller slits sends zero intensity in the
direction θ. The combination gives zero intensity as well.

CHAPTER 11
(a) 7.24 × 1018 Hz
(b) 0.041 nm
(a) 0.34 eV = 0.54 × 10–19J
(b) 0.34 V
(c) 344 km/s
1.5 eV = 2.4 × 10–19 J
(a) 3.14 × 10–19J, 1.05 × 10–27 kg m/s
(b) 3 × 1016 photons/s
(c) 0.63 m/s
11.5 4 × 1021 photons/m2 s
11.6 6.59 × 10–34 J s
11.7 (a) 3.38 × 10–19 J = 2.11 eV
(b) 3.0 × 1020 photons/s
11.8 2.0 V
11.9 No, because ν < νo
11.10 4.73 × 1014 Hz
11.11 2.16 eV = 3.46 × 10–19J

11.1
11.2
11.3
11.4

11.12 (a) 4.04 × 10–24 kg m s–1
–24

kg m s

–25

J = 4.34 µeV

11.13 (a) 5.92 × 10

11.14 (a) 6.95 × 10

–1

11.15 (a) 1.7 × 10–35 m

(b) 0.164 nm
(b) 6.50 × 106 m s–1

(b) 1.1 × 10–32 m

11.16 (a) 6.63 × 10–25 kg m/s (for both)
11.17
11.18
11.19
11.20

(c) 0.112 nm

(b) 3.78 × 10–28 J = 0.236 neV
(c) 3.0 × 10–23 m
(b) 1.24 keV

(c) 1.51 eV

(a) 6.686 × 10–21 J = 4.174 × 10–2 eV
(b) 0.145 nm
λ = h/p = h/(hν/c) = c/ν
0.028 nm
(a) Use eV = (m v 2/2) i.e., v = [(2eV/m)]1/2 ; v = 1.33 × 107 m s–1.
(b) If we use the same formula with V = 107 V, we get v = 1.88 ×
109 m s–1. This is clearly wrong, since nothing can move with a
speed greater than the speed of light (c = 3 × 108 m s–1). Actually,
the above formula for kinetic energy (m v 2/2) is valid only when
(v/c) << 1. At very high speeds when (v/c ) is comparable to
(though always less than) 1, we come to the relativistic domain
2022-23

509

Physics
where the following formulae are valid:
Relativistic momentum p = m v
Total energy E = m c 2
Kinetic energy K = m c 2 – m 0 c 2,
 v2 
where the relativistic mass m is given by m = m 0 1 − 2 
 c 

−1 / 2

m0 is called the rest mass of the particle. These relations also
imply:
E = (p 2c 2 + m 02 c4)1/2
Note that in the relativisitc domain when v/c is comparable to 1, K
or energy ≥ m 0c 2 (rest mass energy). The rest mass energy of electron
is about 0.51 MeV. Thus a kinetic energy of 10 MeV, being much
greater than electron’s rest mass energy, implies relativistic domain.
Using relativistic formulas, v (for 10 MeV kinetic energy) = 0.999 c.
11.21 (a) 22.7 cm
(b) No. As explained above, a 20 MeV electron moves at relativistic
speed. Consequently, the non-relativistic formula R = (m 0v/e B )
is not valid. The relativistic formula is
R = p / eB = mv / eB

or

(

R = m 0v / eB 1 – v 2 / c 2

)

11.22 We have e V = (m v 2/2) and R = (m v/e B) which gives (e/m) =
(2V/R 2 B 2 ); using the given data (e/m) = 1.73 × 1011 C kg –1.
11.23 (a) 27.6 keV
(b) of the order of 30 kV
11.24 Use λ = (hc/E) with E = 5.1 × 1.602 × 10–10J to get λ = 2.43 × 10–16 m.
11.25 (a) For λ = 500 m, E = (h c/ λ) = 3.98 × 10–28J. Number of photons
emitted per second
= 104J s–1/3.98 × 10–28J ∼ 3 × 1031 s–1
We see that the energy of a radiophoton is exceedingly small,
and the number of photons emitted per second in a radio beam
is enormously large. There is, therefore, negligible error involved
in ignoring the existence of a minimum quantum of energy
(photon) and treating the total energy of a radio wave as
continuous.
(b) For ν = 6 × 1014 Hz, E ∼ 4 × 10–19J. Photon flux corresponding to
minimum intensity
= 10–10 W m–2/4×10–19J = 2.5 × 108 m–2 s–1
Number of photons entering the pupil per second = 2.5 × 108 ×
0.4 × 10–4 s–1 = 104 s–1. Though this number is not as large as in
(a) above, it is large enough for us never to ‘sense’ or ‘count’
individual photons by our eye.

φ0
= 1.0 × 1015 Hz; λ = 6328Å
h
corresponds to ν = 4.7 × 1014 Hz < ν0. The photo-cell will not respond
howsoever high be the intensity of laser light.
11.27 Use e V0 = h ν – φ0 for both sources. From the data on the first source,
φ0 = 1.40 eV. Use this value to obtain for the second source V0 = 1.50 V.
11.26 φ0 = h ν – e V0 = 6.7 × 10–19 J = 4.2 eV; ν0 =

510
2022-23

Answers
11.28 Obtain V0 versus ν plot. The slope of the plot is (h/e) and its intercept
on the ν-axis is ν0. The first four points lie nearly on a straight line
which intercepts the ν-axis at ν0 = 5.0 × 1014 Hz (threshold frequency).
The fifth point corresponds to ν < ν 0; there is no photoelectric
emission and therefore no stopping voltage is required to stop the
current. Slope of the plot is found to be 4.15 × 10–15 V s. Using e = 1.6 ×
10–19 C, h = 6.64 × 10–34 J s (standard value h = 6.626 × 10–34 J s), φ0 =
h ν0 = 2.11 V.
11.29 It is found that the given incident frequency ν is greater than ν0
(Na), and ν0 (K); but less than ν0 (Mo), and ν0 (Ni). Therefore, Mo and
Ni will not give photoelectric emission. If the laser is brought closer,
intensity of radiation increases, but this does not affect the result
regarding Mo and Ni. However, photoelectric current from Na and K
will increase in proportion to intensity.
11.30 Assume one conduction electron per atom. Effective atomic area
~10–20 m2
Number of electrons in 5 layers
=

5 × 2 ×10−4 m2
= 1017
10−20 m2

Incident power
= 10–5 W m–2 × 2 × 10–4 m2 = 2 × 10–9 W
In the wave picture, incident power is uniformly absorbed by all the
electrons continuously. Consequently, energy absorbed per second
per electron
= 2 × 10–9/1017 = 2 × 10–26 W
Time required for photoelectric emission
= 2 × 1.6 × 10–19J/2 × 10–26 W = 1.6 × 107 s
which is about 0.5 year.
Implication: Experimentally, photoelectric emission is observed nearly
instantaneously (∼10 –9 s): Thus, the wave picture is in gross
disagreement with experiment. In the photon-picture, energy of the
radiation is not continuously shared by all the electrons in the top
layers. Rather, energy comes in discontinuous ‘quanta’. and
absorption of energy does not take place gradually. A photon is either
not absorbed, or absorbed by an electron nearly instantly.
11.31 For λ = 1 Å, electron’s energy = 150 eV; photon’s energy = 12.4 keV.
Thus, for the same wavelength, a photon has much greater energy
than an electron.
11.32 (a)

h
h
=
Thus, for same K, λ decreases with m as
p
2 mK
(1/ m ). Now (mn/me) = 1838.6; therefore for the same energy,

λ=

(

(150 eV) as in Ex. 11.31, wavelength of neutron = 1/ 1838.6

)×

10 m = 2.33×10 m. The interatomic spacing is about a
hundred times greater. A neutron beam of 150 eV energy is
therefore not suitable for diffraction experiments.
–10

–12

511
2022-23

Physics
(b) λ = 1.45 × 10–10 m [Use λ = (h / 3 m k T ) ] which is comparable
to interatomic spacing in a crystal.
Clearly, from (a) and (b) above, thermal neutrons are a suitable
probe for diffraction experiments; so a high energy neutron beam
should be first thermalised before using it for diffraction.
11.33 λ = 5.5 × 10–12 m
λ ( yellow light) = 5.9 × 10–7m
Resolving Power (RP) is inversely proportional to wavelength. Thus,
RP of an electron microscope is about 105 times that of an optical
microscope. In practice, differences in other (geometrical) factors
can change this comparison somewhat.
6.63 × 10 –34 Js
= 6.63 × 10–19 kg m s–1
λ
10 –15 m
Use the relativistic formula for energy:
E 2 = c 2p 2 + m 02 c 4 = 9 × (6.63)2 × 10–22 + (0.511 × 1.6)2 × 10–26
∼ 9 × (6.63)2 × 10–22,
the second term (rest mass energy) being negligible.
Therefore, E = 1.989 × 10–10 J = 1.24 BeV. Thus, electron energies
from the accelerator must have been of the order of a few BeV.

11.34 p =

h

=

4 ×10 3
kg
6 ×1023
This gives λ = 0.73 × 10–10 m. Mean separation
r = (V/N)1/3 = (kT/p)1/3
For T = 300 K, p = 1.01 × 105 Pa, r = 3.4 × 10–9 m. We find r >> λ.
11.36 Using the same formula as in Exercise 11.35, λ = 6.2 × 10–9 m which
is much greater than the given inter-electron separation.
11.37 (a) Quarks are thought to be confined within a proton or neutron
by forces which grow stronger if one tries to pull them apart. It,
therefore, seems that though fractional charges may exist in
nature, observable charges are still integral multiples of e.
(b) Both the basic relations e V = (1/2 ) m v 2 or e E = m a and
e B v =m v 2/r, for electric and magnetic fields, respectively, show
that the dynamics of electrons is determined not by e, and m
separately but by the combination e/m.
(c) At low pressures, ions have a chance to reach their respective
electrodes and constitute a current. At ordinary pressures, ions
have no chance to do so because of collisions with gas molecules
and recombination.
(d) Work function merely indicates the minimum energy required
for the electron in the highest level of the conduction band to
get out of the metal. Not all electrons in the metal belong to this
level. They occupy a continuous band of levels. Consequently,
for the same incident radiation, electrons knocked off from
different levels come out with different energies.
(e) The absolute value of energy E (but not momentum p) of any
particle is arbitrary to within an additive constant. Hence, while
λ is physically significant, absolute value of ν of a matter wave of
an electron has no direct physical meaning. The phase speed νλ

11.35 Use λ =

h
3m k T

512
2022-23

; m =
He

Answers
is likewise not physically significant. The group speed given by

dν
dE
d  p2  p
=
=

=
d (1/ λ ) dp
dp  2m  m
is physically meaningful.

CHAPTER 12
(a) No different from
(b) Thomson’s model; Rutherford’s model
(c) Rutherford’s model
(d) Thomson’s model; Rutherford’s model
(e) Both the models
12.2 The nucleus of a hydrogen atom is a proton. The mass of it is
1.67 × 10–27 kg, whereas the mass of an incident α-particle is
6.64 × 10–27 kg. Because the scattering particle is more massive than
the target nuclei (proton), the α-particle won’t bounce back in even
in a head-on collision. It is similar to a football colliding with a tenis
ball at rest. Thus, there would be no large-angle scattering.
12.3 820 nm.
12.4 5.6 × 1014 Hz
12.5 13.6 eV; –27.2 eV
12.6 9.7 × 10 – 8 m; 3.1 × 1015 Hz.
12.7 (a) 2.18 × 106 m/s; 1.09 × 106 m/s; 7.27 × 105 m/s
(b) 1.52 × 10–16 s; 1.22 × 10–15 s; 4.11 × 10–15 s.
12.8 2.12×10–10 m; 4.77 × 10–10 m
12.9 Lyman series: 103 nm and 122 nm; Balmer series: 656 nm.
12.10 2.6 × 1074
12.11 (a) About the same.
(b) Much less.
(c) It suggests that the scattering is predominantly due to a single
collision, because the chance of a single collision increases
linearly with the number of target atoms, and hence linearly
with thickness.
(d) In Thomson’s model, a single collision causes very little
deflection. The observed average scattering angle can be
explained only by considering multiple scattering. So it is wrong
to ignore multiple scattering in Thomson’s model. In
Rutherford’s model, most of the scattering comes through a
single collision and multiple scattering effects can be ignored
as a first approximation.
12.12 The first orbit Bohr’s model has a radius a 0 given by
12.1

4 π ε 0 (h / 2π)2
. If we consider the atom bound by the gravitational
me e 2
2
force (Gmpme/r ), we should replace (e2/4 π ε0) by Gm pm e. That is, the
(h / 2π)2
radius of the first Bohr orbit is given by a G0 =
≅ 1.2 × 1029 m.
Gm pm e2

a0 =

513
2022-23

Physics
This is much greater than the estimated size of the whole universe!
12.13

ν=

me 4
1
me 4 (2n − 1)
 1
− 2 =
3 2
2
3 
2
(4 π) ε 0 (h / 2π)  (n − 1) n  (4π) ε 0 (h / 2π)3n 2 (n − 1)2
3

For large n, ν ≅

me 4
32 π ε (h / 2π)3 n 3
3

2
0

Orbital frequency νc = (v/2 π r ). In Bohr model v =

r =

n (h / 2π)
, and
mr

me 4
n (h / 2π) =
4 π ε 0 (h / 2π)2 2
.
This
gives
ν
=
n
c
32 π3 ε 02 (h / 2π)3 n 3
2 π mr 2
me 2

which is same as ν for large n.


e2

12.14 (a) The quantity
2  has the dimensions of length. Its value
 4 π ε 0mc 
–15
is 2.82 ×10 m – much smaller than the typical atomic size.

4 πε 0 (h / 2π)2
has the dimensions of length. Its
me 2
value is 0.53 × 10–10 m – of the order of atomic sizes. (Note that
the dimensional arguments cannot, of course, tell us that we
should use 4π and h/2π in place of h to arrive at the right size.)

(b) The quantity

12.15 In Bohr’s model, mvr =

nh
2π

and

mv 2
Ze 2
=
r
4 π ε 0r 2

which give

1
Ze 2
;r =
mv 2 =
2
8 π ε 0r
These relations have nothing to do with the choice of the zero of
potential energy. Now, choosing the zero of potential energy at infinity
we have V = – (Z e2/4 π ε 0 r) which gives V = –2T and E = T + V = – T
(a) The quoted value of E = – 3.4 eV is based on the customary
choice of zero of potential energy at infinity. Using E = – T, the
kinetic energy of the electron in this state is + 3.4 eV.
(b) Using V = – 2T, potential energy of the electron is = – 6.8 eV
(c) If the zero of potential energy is chosen differently, kinetic energy
does not change. Its value is + 3.4 eV independent of the choice
of the zero of potential energy. The potential energy, and the
total energy of the state, however, would alter if a different zero
of the potential energy is chosen.
12.16 Angular momenta associated with planetary motion are
incomparably large relative to h . For example, angular momentum
of the earth in its orbital motion is of the order of 1070h . In terms of
the Bohr’s quantisation postulate, this corresponds to a very large
value of n (of the order of 10 70). For such large values of n, the
differences in the successive energies and angular momenta of the
quantised levels of the Bohr model are so small compared to the
energies and angular momenta respectively for the levels that one
can, for all practical purposes, consider the levels continuous.
T=

514

2022-23

Answers
12.17 All that is needed is to replace m e by m µ in the formulas of the Bohr
model. We note that keeping other factors fixed, r ∝ (1/m) and E ∝ m.
Therefore,
rµ =

Eµ=

re m e 0.53 ×10
=
mµ
207

Ee m µ
me

13

= 2.56 × 10–13 m

= – (13.6 × 207) eV ≅ – 2.8 keV

CHAPTER 13
13.1
13.2
13.3
13.4
13.5

(a) 6.941 u
(b) 19.9%, 80.1%
20.18 u
104.7 MeV
8.79 MeV, 7.84 MeV
1.584 × 1025 MeV or 2.535×1012J

13.6

i)

226
88

32
15

iii)
v)

Ra →

11
6

vii)

222
86

Rn + 42 He

32
P → 16
S +e – + ν

C → 115B +e+ +ν

120
54

ii)

242
94

4
Pu → 238
92 U + 2 He

iv)

210
83

vi)

97
43

–
B → 210
84 Po + e +ν

+
Tc → 97
42 Mo + e +ν

Xe + e – → 120
53 I + ν

13.7
13.8
13.9
13.10
13.11
13.12

(a) 5 T years
(b) 6.65 T years
4224 years
7.126 ×10–6 g
7.877 ×1010 Bq or 2.13 Ci
1.23
(a) Q = 4.93 MeV, Eα = 4.85 MeV
(b) Q = 6.41 MeV, Eα = 6.29 MeV

13.13

11
6

+
C → 11
5 B + e +ν + Q

,
where the masses used are those of nuclei and not of atoms. If we
use atomic masses, we have to add 6m e in case of 116C and 5m e in
case of 115B. Hence
(Note m e has been doubled)
Using given masses, Q = 0.961 MeV.
Q = E d+ Ee+ Eν
The daughter nucleus is too heavy compared to e+ and ν, so it carries
negligible energy (E d ≈0). If the kinetic energy (E ν) carried by the
neutrino is minimum (i.e., zero), the positron carries maximum
energy, and this is practically all energy Q; hence maximum E e ≈ Q).
13.14

(

)

(

)

23
23
2
23
Ne → 11
Na + e– +ν + Q ; Q = m N 10 Ne – m N 11 Na – m e  c , where the
masses used are masses of nuclei and not of atoms as in Exercise

23
10

13.13. Using atomic masses Q = m

(

23
10

)

Ne – m

(

23
11

)

Na  c 2 . Note m e has

515
2022-23

Physics
been cancelled. Using given masses, Q = 4.37 MeV. As in Exercise 13.13,
maximum kinetic energy of the electron (max Ee ) = Q = 4.37 MeV.
13.15 (i) Q = – 4.03 MeV; endothermic
(ii) Q = 4.62 MeV; exothermic
13.16 Q = m

(

56
26

13.17 4.536 × 10

)

Fe – 2m

26

(

)

28
13

Al = 26.90 MeV; not possible.

MeV

13.18 Energy generated per gram of
235
92

The amount of
=

235
92

U =

6 × 1023 × 200 × 1.6 × 10 −13
J g −1
235

U consumed in 5y with 80% on-time

5 × 0.8 × 3.154 × 1016 × 235
g
1.2 × 1.6 × 1013

The initial amount of

235
92

= 1544 kg

U = 3088 kg.

4

13.19 About 4.9 × 10 y
13.20 360 KeV
13.22 Consider the competing processes:
A
Z

X → ZA –1 Y + e+ + νe + Q1 (positron emission)

e– +

A
Z

X → ZA –1 Y + νe + Q2 (electron capture)

Q 1 = m N

= m

( X) – m (
A
Z

( X) – m (
A
Z

)

Y – m e  c 2

N

A
Z –1

A
Z –1

Y – 2m e  c 2

( )

)

(

)

( )

(

)

A
A
2
A
A
2
Q 2 = m N Z X + m e – m N Z –1 Y  c = m Z X – m Z –1 Y  c
This means Q 1 > 0 implies Q2 > 0 but Q 2 > 0 does not necessarily
mean Q 1 > 0. Hence the result.

13.23

25
12

Mg : 9.3%,

26
12

Mg :11.7%

13.24 Neutron separation energy Sn of a nucleus

A
Z

X is

Sn = m N ( A −Z1 X) + m n − m N ( AZ X) c 2
41
From given data , Sn ( 20
Ca) = 8.36MeV, Sn ( 27
13 Al) = 13.06MeV

13.25 209 d
13.26 For

14
6

C emission

209
14
2
Q = [m N ( 223
88 Ra) − m N ( 82 Pb) − m N ( 6 C)]c
209
14
2
= 31.85 MeV
= [m ( 223
88 Ra) − m ( 82 Pb) − m ( 6 C)]c

For

4
2

219
4
2
= 5.98MeV
He emission, Q = [m ( 223
88 Ra) − m ( 86 Rn) − m ( 2 He)]c

140
99
2
13.27 Q = [m ( 238
= 231.1 MeV
92 U) + m n − m ( 58 Ce) − m ( 44 Ru)]c

516
2022-23

Answers
13.28 (a)

Q = [m ( 21 H) + m ( 31 H) − m ( 42 He) − m n ]c 2 = 17.59 MeV

(b) K.E. required to overcome Coulomb repulsion = 480.0 keV
480.0 KeV = 7.68×10–14 J = 3kT

∴T =

7.68 × 10 –14
3 × 1.381 × 10 –23

(as k = 1.381 × 10 –23 J K –1 )

= 1.85 ×109 K (required temperature)

( )

( )

13.29 K max β1– = 0.284 MeV, K max β2– = 0.960 MeV

ν (γ 1 ) = 2.627 × 1020 Hz , ν (γ 2 ) = 0.995 × 1020 Hz , ν (γ 3 ) = 1.632 × 1020 Hz
13.30 (a) Note that in the interior of Sun, four 11 H nuclei combine to form
one 42 He nucleus releasing about 26 MeV of energy per event.
Energy released in fusion of 1kg of hydrogen = 39 ×1026 MeV
(b) Energy released in fission of 1kg of

235
92

U = 5.1×1026 MeV

The energy released in fusion of 1 kg of hydrogen is about 8
times that of the energy released in the fission of 1 kg of uranium.
13.31 3.076 × 104 kg

CHAPTER 14
14.1
14.2
14.3
14.4
14.5
14.6
14.7
14.8

(c)
(d)
(c)
(c)
(c)
50 Hz for half-wave, 100 Hz for full-wave
No (h ν has to be greater than E g ).
n e ≈ 4.95 × 1022; n h = 4.75 × 109 ; n-type since n e >> n h
For charge neutrality ND – NA = n e – nh ; ne.nh = ni2
Solving these equations, n e =

1
2
2
(N D − N A ) + (N D − N A ) + 4n i 

2 

14.9 About 1 × 105
14.10 (a) 0.0629 A,
(b) 2.97 A,
(c) 0.336 Ω
(d) For both the voltages, the current I will be almost equal to I 0,
showing almost infinite dynamic resistance in the reverse bias.
14.12 NOT ;

14.13 (a) AND
14.14 OR gate
14.15 (a) NOT,

A
0
1

Y
1
0
(b) OR
(b) AND

517
2022-23

Physics

BIBLIOGRAPHY

TEXTBOOKS
For additional reading on the topics covered in this book, you may like to consult one or more of the following
books. Some of these books however are more advanced and contain many more topics than this book.
1
2

Ordinary Level Physics, A.F. Abbott, Arnold-Heinemann (1984).
Advanced Level Physics, M. Nelkon and P. Parker, 6th Edition, Arnold-Heinemann (1987).

3

Advanced Physics, Tom Duncan, John Murray (2000).

4

Fundamentals of Physics, David Halliday, Robert Resnick and Jearl Walker, 7th Edition
John Wily (2004).

5

University Physics (Sears and Zemansky’s), H.D. Young and R.A. Freedman, 11th Edition,
Addison—Wesley (2004).

6
7

Problems in Elementary Physics, B. Bukhovtsa, V. Krivchenkov, G. Myakishev and
V. Shalnov, MIR Publishers, (1971).
Lectures on Physics (3 volumes), R.P. Feynman, Addision – Wesley (1965).

8

Berkeley Physics Course (5 volumes) McGraw Hill (1965).
a.

9

Vol. 1 – Mechanics: (Kittel, Knight and Ruderman)

b.

Vol. 2 – Electricity and Magnetism (E.M. Purcell)

c.
d.

Vol. 3 – Waves and Oscillations (Frank S. Crawford)
Vol. 4 – Quantum Physics (Wichmann)

e.

Vol. 5 – Statistical Physics (F. Reif )

Fundamental University Physics, M. Alonso and E. J. Finn, Addison – Wesley (1967).

10 College Physics, R.L. Weber, K.V. Manning, M.W. White and G.A. Weygand, Tata McGraw
Hill (1977).
11 Physics: Foundations and Frontiers, G. Gamow and J.M. Cleveland, Tata McGraw Hill
(1978).
12 Physics for the Inquiring Mind, E.M. Rogers, Princeton University Press (1960).
13 PSSC Physics Course, DC Heath and Co. (1965) Indian Edition, NCERT (1967).
14 Physics Advanced Level, Jim Breithampt, Stanley Thornes Publishers (2000).
15 Physics, Patrick Fullick, Heinemann (2000).
16 Conceptual Physics, Paul G. Hewitt, Addision—Wesley (1998).
17 College Physics, Raymond A. Serway and Jerry S. Faughn, Harcourt Brace and Co. (1999).
18 University Physics, Harris Benson, John Wiley (1996).
19 University Physics, William P. Crummet and Arthur B. Western, Wm.C. Brown (1994).
20 General Physics, Morton M. Sternheim and Joseph W. Kane, John Wiley (1988).
518
21 Physics, Hans C. Ohanian, W.W. Norton (1989).
2022-23

Bibliography
Answers
Advanced Physics, Keith Gibbs, Cambridge University Press (1996).
Understanding Basic Mechanics, F. Reif, John Wiley (1995).
College Physics, Jerry D. Wilson and Anthony J. Buffa, Prentice Hall (1997).
Senior Physics, Part – I, I.K. Kikoin and A.K. Kikoin, MIR Publishers (1987).
Senior Physics, Part – II, B. Bekhovtsev, MIR Publishers (1988).
Understanding Physics, K. Cummings, Patrick J. Cooney, Priscilla W. Laws and Edward F.
Redish, John Wiley (2005).
28 Essentials of Physics, John D. Cutnell and Kenneth W. Johnson, John Wiley (2005).

22
23
24
25
26
27

GENERAL BOOKS
For instructive and entertaining general reading on science, you may like to read some of the following books.
Remember however, that many of these books are written at a level far beyond the level of the present book.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

12
13
14
15
16

Mr. Tompkins in paperback, G. Gamow, Cambridge University Press (1967).
The Universe and Dr. Einstein, C. Barnett, Time Inc. New York (1962).
Thirty years that Shook Physics, G. Gamow, Double Day, New York (1966).
Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman, R.P. Feynman, Bantam books (1986).
One, Two, Three… Infinity, G. Gamow, Viking Inc. (1961).
The Meaning of Relativity, A. Einstein, (Indian Edition) Oxford and IBH Pub. Co. (1965).
Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature, Niels Bohr, Cambridge (1934).
The Physical Principles of Quantum Theory, W. Heisenberg, University of Chicago Press
(1930).
The Physics—Astronomy Frontier, F. Hoyle and J.V. Narlikar, W.H. Freeman (1980).
The Flying Circus of Physics with Answer, J. Walker, John Wiley and Sons (1977).
Physics for Everyone (series), L.D. Landau and A.I. Kitaigorodski, MIR Publisher (1978).
Book 1: Physical Bodies
Book 2: Molecules
Book 3: Electrons
Book 4: Photons and Nuclei.
Physics can be Fun, Y. Perelman, MIR Publishers (1986).
Power of Ten, Philip Morrison and Eames, W.H. Freeman (1985).
Physics in your Kitchen Lab., I.K. Kikoin, MIR Publishers (1985).
How Things Work: The Physics of Everyday Life, Louis A. Bloomfield, John Wiley (2005).
Physics Matters: An Introduction to Conceptual Physics, James Trefil and Robert M.
Hazen, John Wiley (2004).

519
2022-23

Physics

INDEX

Absorption spectra
AC current
AC Generator
AC voltage
applied to a capacitor
applied to a resistor
applied to an inductor
applied to a series LCR circuit
Accelerators in India
Activity of radioactive substances
Additivity of charges
Alpha decay
Alpha particle scattering
Ammeter
Ampere
Amperes circuital law
Analog signal
AND gate
Andre, Ampere
Angle
of deviation
of incidence
of reflection
of refraction
Angular magnification
Apparent depth
Area element vector
Atomic
mass unit
number
spectra
Aurora Borealis
Band gap
Bar magnet
as solenoid
Barrier potential
Becquerel
Beta decay
Binding energy per nucleon

421
233
224
233
241
234
237
244
142
447
8
449
415
165
155
147
491
492
148
330
355
357
355
339
318
26
439
440
420
139
471
174
176
479
448
450
444

Biot-Savart law
Bohr magneton
Bohr radius
Bohr’s model of atom
Bohr’s postulates
Brewster’s angle
Brewster’s law
C.A. Volta
Capacitance
Capacitive reactance
Capacitive circuit
Capacitor
parallel plate
in parallel
in series
Cartesian sign convention
Cassegrain telescope
Cells
in parallel
in series
Chain reaction
Charging by induction
Charles August de Coulomb
Chromatic aberration
Coercivity
Coherent source
Colour code of resistors
Combination of lenses
Combination of resistors
series
parallel
Composition of nucleus
Concave mirror
Conduction band
Conductivity
Conductors
Conservation of charge
Conservative force
Continuous charge distribution

520
2022-23

143
163
425
422
424
380
381
53
73
241
252
74
79
78
311
341
110
114
113
453
6
11
332
195
360
103
328
107
108
438
312
469
97, 468
5
8
51
32

Index
Control rods
Convex mirror
Coulomb
Coulomb’s law
Critical angle
Curie temperature
Curie
Current
density
loop as a magnetic dipole
sensitivity of galvanometer
Cut-off voltage/Stopping potential
Cyclotron
frequency
Davisson & Germer Experiment
de Broglie
relation
wavelength
explanation
Decay constant
Diamagnetism
Dielectrics
Dielectric
constant
strength
Diffraction
single slit
Digital
electronics
signal
Dioptre
Dipole
moment
moment vector
in uniform electric field
physical significance
Displacement current
Doppler effect
Drift velocity
Earth’s magnetism
Earthing
Eddy currents
Einstein’s photoelectric equation
Electric
charge
current
dipole
displacement
field
field, physical significance
field due to a system of charges
field lines
flux

454
312
11
10
320
194
448
94
97
160
165
391
140
141
403
398
398
430
446
192
71
76
74
367
368
491
491
328
28
28
31
29
270
358
98
185
5
218
394
1
93
27
77
18
20
19
23
25

susceptibility
Electrical energy
Electromagnetic
waves, sources
waves, nature
damping
spectrum
Electron emission
Electrostatic
analog
potential
shielding
Electrostatics
of conductors
Electromotive force (emf )
Emission spectra
Energy
bands
generation in stars
levels
stored in a capacitor
Equipotential surfaces
Excited state
Experiments of Faraday & Henry
Extrinsic semiconductor
Farad
Faraday’s law of Induction
Fast breeder reactor
Ferromagnetism
Field
due to infinite plane sheet
due to uniformly charged thin spherical
shell
Field emission
Flux leakage
Focal length
Force between two parallel currents
Forward bias
Franck-Hertz experiment
Fringe width
Full-wave rectifier
G.S. Ohm
Gamma
rays
decay
Gauss’s law
its applications
in magnetism
Gaussian surface
Geographic meridian
Gold leaf electroscope
Ground state
H.A. Lorentz

72
105
274
275
218
280
387
180
53
69
1
67
110
421
469
455
427
80
60
427
205
474
74
207
453
193
38
39
388
261
311
154
479
428
364
483
95
283
451
33
37
181
35
186
4
427
134

521
2022-23

Physics
Half life
Half-wave rectifier
Hallwachs’ and Lenard’s observations
Henry
Hertz Experiment
Holes
Horizontal component of earth’s
magnetic field
Huygen’s Principle
Impact parameter
Impedence diagram
Inductance
mutual
self
Induction
of charge
Inductive
circuit
reactance
Insulators
Interference
constructive
destructive
fringes
Internal resistance
Intrinsic semiconductor
Ionisation energy
Isobars
Isotones
Isotopes
J.C. Maxwell
K.F. Gauss
Kirchhoff’s rules
Lateral shift
Law
of radioactive decay
of reflection
of refraction
LC oscillations
Lenz’s law
Lens maker’s formula
Light emitting diode
Limitations of Ohm’s law
Linear
charge density
magnification/Magnifying power
Logic gates
Lorentz force
Magnetic
declination
dipole
dipole moment of a revolving electron
field
field lines

448
483
388
220
274
472
187
353
418
246
219
220
222
6
6
252
238
5
361
361
363
110
472
427
441
441
439
270
182
115
317
447
357
356
255
210
326
488
101
32
336
491
134
186
177
162
132
175

field on the axis of a circular current loop 145
flux
182, 206
force on a current carrying conductor
135
force
133
hysteresis
195
inclination
187
intensity
190
meridian
186
moment of a current loop
158
moment
178
permeability
190
potential energy
178
susceptibility
190
torque
178
Magnetisation
189
Majority carriers
476
Mass
defect
443
number
440
energy relation
442
Maxwell’s equations
273
Mean life
448
Meter bridge
120
Michael Faraday
208
Microscope
335
compound
337
Microwaves
281
Minority carriers
476
Mirage
321
Mirror equation
314
Mobility
100
Moderator
454
Motion in a magnetic field
137
Motional emf
212
Moving coil galvanometer
163
Multiplication factor (fission)
454
NAND gate
504
Neutrons
440
Non-polar molecules
72
NOR gate
505
North pole
174
NOT gate
491
n-type semi conductor
475
Nuclear
binding energy
442
density
442
energy
451
fission
452
force
445
fusion
455
holocaust
457
reactor
452
size
441
winter
457

522
2022-23

Index
Numerical aperture
Ohm
Ohm’s law
Optical fibres
OR gate
Orbital magnetic moment
Paramagnetism
Permanent magnets
Permeability of free space
Permittivity
of free space
of medium
Phasors
diagram
Photodiode
Photoelectric effect
Photocell
Photoelectric emission
Photoelectrons
Photon
Pith ball
Plane polarised wave
p-n-p junction
Point charge
Polar molecules
Polarisation
by reflection
by scattering
Polarity of charge
Polaroid
Potential
due to an electric dipole
due to a point charge
due to a system of charges
energy difference
energy for a system of charges
energy of a dipole
energy of a single charge
energy of a system of two charges
energy
Potentiometer
Power (electrical)
factor
in ac circuit
of lens
Pressurised heavy water reactors
Primary coil
Principal focus
Principle of superposition
Principle quantum number
Properties of electric charge
p-type semi conductor
Q factor/quality factor
Quanta of energy
Quantisation of charge

375
95
95
321
491
163
192
195
143
11, 76
76
237
237
487
388
399
388
389
395
2
377
478
10
72
71, 376
380
379
2
378
53
55
54
57
53
61
66
64
65
52
122
106
252
252
327
453
311
15
425
8
476
250
393
8

Radio waves
Radioactivity
Rainbow
Ray optics, validity of
Rayleigh scattering
Rectifier
Red shift
Reflection of light
Refraction
of a plane wave
Refractive index
Relation between field and potential
Relaxation time
Rententivity
Resistance
Resistivity
of some materials
Resolving power
of eye
Resonance
Sharpness
Resonant frequency
Reverse bias
Right hand rule
Root mean square (rms) or effective
current
voltage
Roget’s spiral
Rutherford’s model of atom
Saturation current
Scattering of light
Secondary wavelet
Semiconductors
diode
elemental
compound
Shunt resistance
Snell’s law
Solar cell
Solenoid
South pole
Spectral series
Brackett
Fund
Lyman
Paschen
Spherical mirror
Spin magnetic moment
Surface charge density
Telescope
Temperature dependence of
resistivity
Tesla
Thermionic emission

281
446
333
375
334
483
358
310
318
355
317, 356
61
98
195
95
96, 468
102
373
374
248
249
248
480
149
235
236
156
415
390
334
354
469
479
468
468
164
317, 356
489
151
174
421
422
422
422
422
310, 311
163
32
339
103
135
388

523
2022-23

Physics
Thermonuclear fusion
Thin lens formula
Threshold frequency
Tokamak
Toroid
Torque
on a current loop
on a dipole
Total internal reflection
Transformer
Step-down
Step-up
Truth table
Uncertainty Principle
Unpolarised wave
Ultraviolet rays
Valence band

456
326
392
153
152
157
31
319
259
261
261
491
400
377
282
469

524
2022-23

Velocity selector
Visible rays
Voltage Regulator
Voltage sensitivity of a galvanometer
Voltmeter
Volume charge density
Wattless current
Wavefront
plane
spherical
Wheatstone bridge
Work function
X rays
Young’s experiment
Zener
diode
breakdown

140
282
486
165
165
32
252
353
354
354
118
394
283
362
485
485

Physics

APPENDICES

APPENDIX A 1
THE GREEK ALPHABET

APPENDIX A 2
COMMON SI PREFIXES AND SYMBOLS FOR MULTIPLES AND SUB-MULTIPLES

500
2022-23

Appendices
Answers
APPENDIX A 3
SOME IMPORTANT CONSTANTS

OTHER USEFUL CONSTANTS

501
2022-23

